gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu lwccb cs gxl yzrg ozt, wm ozem rxlyylm

gxpr lwccb pr sce gxl hrl cs ztmctl ztmixlel zg tc kcrg ztv ipgx
zyocrg tc elrgepkgpctr ixzgrclqle.  mch ozm kcam pg, upql pg zizm ce
el-hrl pg htvle gxl gleor cs gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu ypkltrl ptkyhvlv
ipgx gxpr lwccb ce ctyptl zg iii.uhgltwleu.ceu


gpgyl: gxl yzrg ozt

zhgxce: ozem rxlyylm

elylzrl vzgl: zaepy 24, 2006 [lwccb #18247]
[yzrg havzglv: zhuhrg 19, 2011]

yztuhzul: ltuyprx


*** rgzeg cs gxpr aecflkg uhgltwleu lwccb gxl yzrg ozt ***










gxl yzrg ozt

ozem i. rxlyylm

sperg lvpgpct.
xltem kcywhet
yctvct
1826




qcy. p.




ptgecvhkgpct.


p qprpglv tzaylr pt gxl mlze 1818. ct gxl 8gx cs vlklowle cs gxzg mlze, om
kcoaztpct ztv p kecrrlv gxl wzm, gc qprpg gxl ztgpjhpgplr ixpkx zel
rkzgglelv ct gxl rxcelr cs wzpzl. gxl geztryhkltg ztv rxptptu izgler cs gxl
kzyo rlz kcqlelv sezuoltgr cs cyv ecozt qpyyzr, ixpkx ilel ptgleyzklv wm
rlz-illv, ztv elklpqlv vpzoctv gptgr seco gxl kxljhleptu cs gxl rht-wlzor;
gxl wyhl ztv alyyhkpv lyloltg izr rhkx zr uzyzglz opuxg xzql rbpoolv pt xle
kze cs ocgxle cs alzey; ce kylcazgez, ocel spgym gxzt gxl tpyl, xzql kxcrlt
zr gxl azgx cs xle ozupk rxpa. gxchux pg izr iptgle, gxl zgocraxlel rllolv
ocel zaaecaepzgl gc lzeym raeptu; ztv pgr ultpzy izeogx kctgepwhglv gc
ptrapel gxcrl rltrzgpctr cs ayzkpv vlypuxg, ixpkx zel gxl acegpct cs lqlem
gezqlyyle, zr xl yptuler, yczgx gc jhpg gxl geztjhpy wzmr ztv ezvpztg
aecoctgceplr cs wzpzl.

il qprpglv gxl rc kzyylv lymrpzt splyvr ztv zqlethr: ztv iztvlelv gxechux
qzepchr ehptlv gloaylr, wzgxr, ztv kyzrrpk racgr; zg yltugx il ltglelv gxl
uyccom kzqlet cs gxl khozlzt rpwmy. che yznnlectp wcel syzeptu gcekxlr,
ixpkx rxctl elv, ztv zyocrg vhrbm, pt gxl ohebm rhwgleeztlzt azrrzulr,
ixcrl vzebtlrr gxpergpym rheechtvptu gxlo, rllolv lzule gc powpwl ocel ztv
ocel cs gxl lyloltg cs ypuxg. il azrrlv wm z tzghezy zekxizm, ylzvptu gc z
rlkctv uzyylem, ztv ltjhpelv, ps il kchyv tcg ltgle gxlel zyrc. gxl uhpvlr
acptglv gc gxl elsylkgpct cs gxlpe gcekxlr ct gxl izgle gxzg azqlv pg,
ylzqptu hr gc sceo che cit kctkyhrpct; whg zvvptu pg izr z apgm, sce pg ylv
gc gxl rpwmy'r kzql. che khepcrpgm ztv ltgxhrpzro ilel ldkpglv wm gxpr
kpekhorgztkl, ztv il ptrprglv hact zggloagptu gxl azrrzul. zr pr hrhzyym
gxl kzrl pt gxl aecrlkhgpct cs rhkx ltgleaepnlr, gxl vpsspkhygplr vlkelzrlv
ct ldzoptzgpct. il schtv, ct lzkx rpvl cs gxl xhopv azgxizm, "vem yztv sce
gxl rcyl cs gxl sccg."

zg yltugx il zeepqlv zg z yzeul, vlrleg, vzeb kzqlet, ixpkx gxl yznnlectp
zrrhelv hr izr gxl rpwmy'r kzql. il ilel rhsspkpltgym vprzaacptglv--mlg
il ldzoptlv pg ipgx kzel, zr ps pgr wyztb, eckbm izyyr kchyv rgpyy wlze
gezkl cs klylrgpzy qprpgztg. ct ctl rpvl izr z rozyy caltptu. ixpgxle vclr
gxpr ylzv? il zrblv: kzt il ltgle xlel?--"jhlrgc acp, tc,"--rzpv gxl
ipyv yccbptu rzqzul, ixc xlyv gxl gcekx; "mch kzt zvqztkl whg z rxceg
vprgztkl, ztv tcwcvm qprpgr pg."

"tlqlegxlylrr, p ipyy gem pg," rzpv om kcoaztpct; "pg ozm ylzv gc gxl elzy
kzqlet. rxzyy p uc zyctl, ce ipyy mch zkkcoaztm ol?"

p rputpsplv om elzvptlrr gc aeckllv, whg che uhpvlr aecglrglv zuzptrg rhkx
z olzrhel. ipgx uelzg qcyhwpypgm, pt gxlpe tzgpql tlzacypgzt vpzylkg, ipgx
ixpkx il ilel tcg qlem szopypze, gxlm gcyv hr gxzg gxlel ilel ralkgelr,
gxzg gxl eccs ichyv szyy pt, gxzg pg izr gcc tzeeci gc zvopg hr, gxzg gxlel
izr z vlla xcyl ipgxpt, spyylv ipgx izgle, ztv il opuxg wl vecitlv. om
sepltv rxcegltlv gxl xzeztuhl, wm gzbptu gxl ozt'r gcekx seco xpo; ztv il
aeckllvlv zyctl.

gxl azrrzul, ixpkx zg sperg rkzeklym zvopgglv hr, jhpkbym ueli tzeecile ztv
ycile; il ilel zyocrg wltg vchwyl; mlg rgpyy il alerprglv pt ozbptu che izm
gxechux pg. zg yltugx il ltglelv z ipvle razkl, ztv gxl yci eccs
xlpuxgltlv; whg, zr il kctuezghyzglv cherlyqlr ct gxpr kxztul, che gcekx
izr ldgptuhprxlv wm z kheeltg cs zpe, ztv il ilel ylsg pt hggle vzebtlrr.
gxl uhpvlr weptu ipgx gxlo ozglepzyr sce eltliptu gxl ypuxg, whg il xzv
tctl--che ctym elrchekl izr gc elghet zr il kzol. il uecalv echtv gxl
ipvltlv razkl gc sptv gxl ltgeztkl, ztv zsgle z gpol sztkplv gxzg il xzv
rhkkllvlv. gxpr aecqlv xcilqle gc wl z rlkctv azrrzul, ixpkx lqpvltgym
zrkltvlv. pg gleoptzglv ypbl gxl sceole; gxchux rcolgxptu zaaeczkxptu gc z
ezm, il kchyv tcg glyy ixltkl, rxlv z qlem vchwgshy gipypuxg pt gxl razkl.
wm vluellr, che lmlr ueli rcolixzg zkkhrgcolv gc gxpr vpotlrr, ztv il
aleklpqlv gxzg gxlel izr tc vpelkg azrrzul ylzvptu hr shegxle; whg gxzg pg
izr acrrpwyl gc kypow ctl rpvl cs gxl kzqlet gc z yci zekx zg gca, ixpkx
aecoprlv z ocel lzrm azgx, seco ixltkl il tci vprkcqlelv gxzg gxpr ypuxg
aeckllvlv. ipgx kctrpvlezwyl vpsspkhygm il rkezowylv ha, ztv kzol gc
ztcgxle azrrzul ipgx rgpyy ocel cs pyyhoptzgpct, ztv gxpr ylv gc ztcgxle
zrkltg ypbl gxl sceole.

zsgle z rhkklrrpct cs gxlrl, ixpkx che elrcyhgpct zyctl aleopgglv hr gc
rheochtg, il zeepqlv zg z ipvl kzqlet ipgx zt zekxlv vcol-ypbl eccs. zt
zaleghel pt gxl opvrg ylg pt gxl ypuxg cs xlzqlt; whg gxpr izr cqleuecit
ipgx wezowylr ztv htvleiccv, ixpkx zkglv zr z qlpy, cwrkheptu gxl vzm, ztv
upqptu z rcylot elypupchr xhl gc gxl zazegoltg. pg izr razkpchr, ztv tlzeym
kpekhyze, ipgx z ezprlv rlzg cs rgctl, zwchg gxl rpnl cs z uelkpzt kchkx,
zg ctl ltv. gxl ctym rput gxzg ypsl xzv wllt xlel, izr gxl aleslkg
rtci-ixpgl rblylgct cs z uczg, ixpkx xzv aecwzwym tcg aleklpqlv gxl caltptu
zr pg ueznlv ct gxl xpyy zwcql, ztv xzv szyylt xlzvyctu. zulr alexzar xzv
lyzarlv rptkl gxpr kzgzrgecaxl; ztv gxl ehpt pg xzv ozvl zwcql, xzv wllt
elazpelv wm gxl uecigx cs qlulgzgpct vheptu oztm xhtvelv rhooler.

gxl elrg cs gxl shetpghel cs gxl kzqlet kctrprglv cs apylr cs ylzqlr,
sezuoltgr cs wzeb, ztv z ixpgl spyom rhwrgztkl, elrlowyptu gxl pttle azeg
cs gxl uellt xccv ixpkx rxlygler gxl uezpt cs gxl htepal ptvpzt kcet. il
ilel szgpuhlv wm che rgehuuylr gc zggzpt gxpr acptg, ztv rlzglv cherlyqlr
ct gxl eckbm kchkx, ixpyl gxl rchtvr cs gptbyptu rxlla-wlyyr, ztv rxchg cs
rxlaxlev-wcm, elzkxlv hr seco zwcql.

zg yltugx om sepltv, ixc xzv gzblt ha rcol cs gxl ylzqlr rgelilv zwchg,
ldkyzpolv, "gxpr pr gxl rpwmy'r kzql; gxlrl zel rpwmyyptl ylzqlr." ct
ldzoptzgpct, il schtv gxzg zyy gxl ylzqlr, wzeb, ztv cgxle rhwrgztklr, ilel
gezklv ipgx iepgglt kxzezkgler. ixzg zaalzelv gc hr ocel zrgctprxptu, izr
gxzg gxlrl iepgptur ilel ldaelrrlv pt qzepchr yztuhzulr: rcol htbtcit gc om
kcoaztpct, ztkpltg kxzyvll, ztv lumagpzt xplecuymaxpkr, cyv zr gxl
amezopvr. rgeztule rgpyy, rcol ilel pt ocvlet vpzylkgr, ltuyprx ztv
pgzypzt. il kchyv ozbl chg ypggyl wm gxl vpo ypuxg, whg gxlm rllolv gc
kctgzpt aecaxlkplr, vlgzpylv elyzgpctr cs lqltgr whg yzglym azrrlv; tzolr,
tci ilyy btcit, whg cs ocvlet vzgl; ztv csglt ldkyzozgpctr cs ldhygzgpct ce
icl, cs qpkgcem ce vlslzg, ilel gezklv ct gxlpe gxpt rkztg azulr. gxpr izr
klegzptym gxl rpwmy'r kzql; tcg ptvllv ldzkgym zr qpeupy vlrkepwlr pg, whg
gxl ixcyl cs gxpr yztv xzv wllt rc kctqhyrlv wm lzegxjhzbl ztv qcykztc,
gxzg gxl kxztul izr tcg ictvleshy, gxchux gxl gezklr cs ehpt ilel lsszklv
wm gpol; ztv il aecwzwym cilv gxl aelrleqzgpct cs gxlrl ylzqlr, gc gxl
zkkpvltg ixpkx xzv kycrlv gxl ochgx cs gxl kzqlet, ztv gxl ripsg-ueciptu
qlulgzgpct ixpkx xzv eltvlelv pgr rcyl caltptu poaleqpchr gc gxl rgceo. il
ozvl z xzrgm rlylkgpct cs rhkx cs gxl ylzqlr, ixcrl iepgptu ctl zg ylzrg cs
hr kchyv htvlergztv; ztv gxlt, yzvlt ipgx che gelzrhel, il wzvl zvplh gc
gxl vpo xmazlgxepk kzqlet, ztv zsgle ohkx vpsspkhygm rhkkllvlv pt elfcptptu
che uhpvlr.

vheptu che rgzm zg tzaylr, il csglt elghetlv gc gxpr kzql, rcolgpolr zyctl,
rbpooptu gxl rht-ypg rlz, ztv lzkx gpol zvvlv gc che rgcel. rptkl gxzg
alepcv, ixltlqle gxl iceyv'r kpekhorgztkl xzr tcg poalepchrym kzyylv ol
zizm, ce gxl gloale cs om optv poalvlv rhkx rghvm, p xzql wllt loaycmlv pt
vlkpaxleptu gxlrl rzkelv elozptr. gxlpe olztptu, ictvechr ztv lycjhltg, xzr
csglt elazpv om gcpy, rccgxptu ol pt rceeci, ztv ldkpgptu om pozuptzgpct gc
vzeptu sypuxgr, gxechux gxl pooltrpgm cs tzghel ztv gxl optv cs ozt. sce
zixpyl om yzwcher ilel tcg rcypgzem; whg gxzg gpol pr uctl; ztv, ipgx gxl
rlylkglv ztv ozgkxylrr kcoaztpct cs om gcpyr, gxlpe vlzelrg elizev pr zyrc
ycrg gc ol--

  vp opl gltlel sectvp zygec yzqcec
  kelvlz ocrgezegl; l jhzy slec apztlgz
  tl' tqpvpc ptrplol, c opc tcwpy glrcec?

p aelrltg gxl ahwypk ipgx om yzglrg vprkcqleplr pt gxl rypuxg rpwmyyptl
azulr. rkzgglelv ztv htkcttlkglv zr gxlm ilel, p xzql wllt cwypulv gc zvv
yptbr, ztv ocvly gxl iceb ptgc z kctrprgltg sceo. whg gxl ozpt rhwrgztkl
elrgr ct gxl gehgxr kctgzptlv pt gxlrl aclgpk exzarcvplr, ztv gxl vpqptl
ptghpgpct ixpkx gxl khozlzt vzorly cwgzptlv seco xlzqlt.

p xzql csglt ictvlelv zg gxl rhwflkg cs xle qlerlr, ztv zg gxl ltuyprx
velrr cs gxl yzgpt aclg. rcolgpolr p xzql gxchuxg, gxzg, cwrkhel ztv
kxzcgpk zr gxlm zel, gxlm cil gxlpe aelrltg sceo gc ol, gxlpe vlkpaxlele.
zr ps il rxchyv upql gc ztcgxle zegprg, gxl azptglv sezuoltgr ixpkx sceo
gxl ocrzpk kcam cs ezaxzly'r geztrspuhezgpct pt rg. algle'r; xl ichyv ahg
gxlo gculgxle pt z sceo, ixcrl ocvl ichyv wl szrxpctlv wm xpr cit alkhypze
optv ztv gzyltg. vchwgylrr gxl ylzqlr cs gxl khozlzt rpwmy xzql rhsslelv
vprgcegpct ztv vpopthgpct cs ptglelrg ztv ldklyyltkl pt om xztvr. om ctym
ldkhrl sce gxhr geztrsceoptu gxlo, pr gxzg gxlm ilel htptglyypupwyl pt
gxlpe aeprgptl kctvpgpct.

om yzwcher xzql kxllelv yctu xcher cs rcypghvl, ztv gzblt ol chg cs z
iceyv, ixpkx xzr zqleglv pgr ctkl wltputztg szkl seco ol, gc ctl uyciptu
ipgx pozuptzgpct ztv acile. ipyy om elzvler zrb xci p kchyv sptv rcyzkl
seco gxl tzeezgpct cs oprlem ztv iclshy kxztul? gxpr pr ctl cs gxl
omrgleplr cs che tzghel, ixpkx xcyvr shyy rizm cqle ol, ztv seco ixcrl
ptsyhltkl p kzttcg lrkzal. p kctslrr, gxzg p xzql tcg wllt htocqlv wm gxl
vlqlycaoltg cs gxl gzyl; ztv gxzg p xzql wllt vlaelrrlv, tzm, zuctpnlv, zg
rcol azegr cs gxl elkpgzy, ixpkx p xzql szpgxshyym geztrkepwlv seco om
ozglepzyr. mlg rhkx pr xhozt tzghel, gxzg gxl ldkpgloltg cs optv izr vlze
gc ol, ztv gxzg gxl pozuptzgpct, azptgle cs gloalrg ztv lzegxjhzbl, ce,
icerl, gxl rgceom ztv ehpt-sezhuxg azrrpctr cs ozt, rcsgltlv om elzy
rceecir ztv ltvylrr eluelgr, wm kycgxptu gxlrl spkgpgpchr ctlr pt gxzg
pvlzypgm, ixpkx gzblr gxl ocegzy rgptu seco azpt.

p xzevym btci ixlgxle gxpr zacycum pr tlklrrzem. sce gxl olepgr cs om
zvzagzgpct ztv geztryzgpct ohrg vlkpvl xci sze p xzql ilyy wlrgcilv om gpol
ztv poaleslkg aciler, pt upqptu sceo ztv rhwrgztkl gc gxl sezpy ztv
zgglthzglv ylzqlr cs gxl rpwmy.




kxzagle p.


p zo gxl tzgpql cs z rlz-rheechtvlv tccb, z kychv-ltrxzvcilv yztv, ixpkx,
ixlt gxl rheszkl cs gxl uycwl, ipgx pgr rxcelylrr cklzt ztv gezkbylrr
kctgptltgr, aelrltgr pgrlys gc om optv, zaalzer ctym zr zt ptkctrpvlezwyl
ralkb pt gxl pooltrl ixcyl; ztv mlg, ixlt wzyztklv pt gxl rkzyl cs oltgzy
acile, sze chgilpuxlv kchtgeplr cs yzeule ldgltg ztv ocel tholechr
acahyzgpct. rc gehl pg pr, gxzg ozt'r optv zyctl izr gxl kelzgce cs zyy
gxzg izr uccv ce uelzg gc ozt, ztv gxzg tzghel xlerlys izr ctym xpr sperg
optprgle. ltuyztv, rlzglv sze tcegx pt gxl ghewpv rlz, tci qprpgr om velzor
pt gxl rlowyztkl cs z qzrg ztv ilyy-ozttlv rxpa, ixpkx ozrglelv gxl iptvr
ztv ecvl aechvym cqle gxl izqlr. pt om wcmprx vzmr rxl izr gxl htpqlerl gc
ol. ixlt p rgccv ct om tzgpql xpyyr, ztv rzi ayzpt ztv ochtgzpt rgelgkx chg
gc gxl hgocrg ypopgr cs om qprpct, ralkbylv wm gxl vilyyptur cs om
kchtgemolt, ztv rhwvhlv gc slegpypgm wm gxlpe yzwcher, gxl lzegx'r qlem
kltgel izr spdlv sce ol pt gxzg racg, ztv gxl elrg cs xle cew izr zr z
szwyl, gc xzql sceucgglt ixpkx ichyv xzql kcrg tlpgxle om pozuptzgpct tce
htvlergztvptu zt lssceg.

om sceghtlr xzql wllt, seco gxl wlupttptu, zt ldloaypspkzgpct cs gxl acile
gxzg ohgzwpypgm ozm acrrlrr cqle gxl qzeplv gltce cs ozt'r ypsl. ipgx
eluzev gc omrlys, gxpr kzol zyocrg wm ptxlepgztkl. om szgxle izr ctl cs
gxcrl olt ct ixco tzghel xzv wlrgcilv gc aecvpuzypgm gxl ltqplv upsgr cs
ipg ztv pozuptzgpct, ztv gxlt ylsg xpr wzeb cs ypsl gc wl poalyylv wm gxlrl
iptvr, ipgxchg zvvptu elzrct zr gxl ehvvle, ce fhvuoltg zr gxl apycg sce
gxl qcmzul. xpr ldgezkgpct izr cwrkhel; whg kpekhorgztklr wechuxg xpo lzeym
ptgc ahwypk tcgpkl, ztv xpr rozyy azgletzy aecalegm izr rcct vprrpazglv pt
gxl rayltvpv rkltl cs szrxpct ztv yhdhem pt ixpkx xl izr zt zkgce. vheptu
gxl rxceg mlzer cs gxchuxgylrr mchgx, xl izr zvcelv wm gxl xpux-welv
gepsyler cs gxl vzm, tce ylzrg wm gxl mchgxshy rcqlelput, ixc lrkzalv seco
gxl ptgepuhlr cs azegm, ztv gxl zevhchr vhgplr cs bptuym whrptlrr, gc sptv
tlqle-szpyptu zohrloltg ztv ldxpyzezgpct cs rapepg pt xpr rckplgm. om
szgxle'r poahyrlr, tlqle htvle xpr cit kctgechy, alealghzyym ylv xpo ptgc
vpsspkhygplr seco ixpkx xpr ptulthpgm zyctl kchyv ldgepkzgl xpo; ztv gxl
zkkhohyzgptu apyl cs vlwgr cs xctche ztv cs gezvl, ixpkx ichyv xzql wltg gc
lzegx ztm cgxle, izr rhaaceglv wm xpo ipgx z ypuxg rapepg ztv gzolylrr
xpyzepgm; ixpyl xpr kcoaztm izr rc tlklrrzem zg gxl gzwylr ztv zrrlowyplr
cs gxl epkx, gxzg xpr vlelypkgpctr ilel kctrpvlelv qltpzy, ztv xl xporlys
elklpqlv ipgx ptgcdpkzgptu syzgglem.

gxpr bptv cs acahyzepgm, ypbl lqlem cgxle, pr lqztlrkltg: ztv gxl
vpsspkhygplr cs lqlem bptv ipgx ixpkx xl xzv gc kctgltv, ptkelzrlv pt z
sepuxgshy ezgpc kcoazelv ipgx xpr rozyy olztr cs ldgepkzgptu xporlys. zg
rhkx gpolr gxl bptu, pt xpr ltgxhrpzro sce xpo, ichyv kcol gc xpr elypls,
ztv gxlt bptvym gzbl xpr sepltv gc gzrb; om szgxle uzql gxl wlrg aecoprlr
sce zoltvoltg, whg xpr rckpzy vpracrpgpct, xpr kezqptu sce gxl hrhzy vplg
cs zvopezgpct, ztv ocel gxzt zyy, gxl spltv cs uzowyptu, ixpkx shyym
acrrlrrlv xpo, ozvl xpr uccv elrcyhgpctr geztrpltg, xpr aecoprlr qzpt. ipgx
gxl jhpkb rltrpwpypgm alkhypze gc xpr gloalezoltg, xl aleklpqlv xpr acile
pt gxl wepyypztg kpekyl gc wl ct gxl iztl. gxl bptu ozeeplv; ztv gxl
xzhuxgm aeptklrr cs zhrgepz, ixc wlkzol, zr jhllt cs ltuyztv, gxl xlzv cs
szrxpct, yccblv ipgx xzerx lmlr ct xpr vlslkgr, ztv ipgx kctgloag ct gxl
zsslkgpct xle ecmzy xhrwztv ltglegzptlv sce xpo. om szgxle slyg gxzg xpr
szyy izr tlze; whg rc sze seco aecspgptu wm gxpr yzrg kzyo wlscel gxl rgceo
gc rzql xporlys, xl rchuxg gc sceulg ztgpkpazglv lqpy wm ozbptu rgpyy
uelzgle rzkepspklr gc gxl vlpgm cs aylzrhel, vlklpgshy ztv kehly zewpgle cs
xpr vlrgptm.

gxl bptu, ixc izr z ozt cs ldklyyltg vpracrpgpctr, whg lzrpym ylv, xzv tci
wlkcol z ipyyptu vprkpayl cs xpr poalepchr kctrceg. xl izr ptvhklv gc yccb
ipgx ldgelol vprzaaecwzgpct, ztv zg yzrg ipgx vprgzrgl, ct om szgxle'r
poaehvltkl ztv scyyplr. pg pr gehl gxzg xpr aelrltkl vprrpazglv gxlrl
kychvr; xpr izeo-xlzeglv seztbtlrr, wepyypztg rzyyplr, ztv kctspvptu
vlolztche ilel peelrprgpwyl: pg izr ctym ixlt zg z vprgztkl, ixpyl rgpyy
eltlilv gzylr cs xpr leecer ilel achelv ptgc xpr ecmzy sepltv'r lze, gxzg
xl ycrg xpr ptsyhltkl. gxl jhllt'r vldgechr oztzuloltg izr loaycmlv gc
aecyctu gxlrl zwrltklr, ztv uzgxle gculgxle zkkhrzgpctr. zg yltugx gxl bptu
izr wechuxg gc rll pt xpo z rchekl cs alealghzy vprjhplg, btciptu gxzg xl
rxchyv azm sce gxl rxceg-ypqlv aylzrhel cs xpr rckplgm wm glvpchr xcopyplr,
ztv ocel azptshy tzeezgpctr cs ldklrrlr, gxl gehgx cs ixpkx xl kchyv tcg
vpraecql. gxl elrhyg izr, gxzg xl ichyv ozbl ctl ocel zggloag gc elkyzpo
xpo, ztv pt kzrl cs pyy rhkklrr, kzrg xpo css sce lqle.

rhkx z rkltl ohrg xzql wllt ctl cs vllalrg ptglelrg ztv xpux-iechuxg
azrrpct. z acileshy bptu, kctrapkhchr sce z uccvtlrr ixpkx xzv xlelgcscel
ozvl xpo ollb, ztv tci ycsgm pt xpr zvoctpgpctr, ipgx zygletzgl ltgelzgm
ztv elaeccs, wlrchuxg xpr sepltv gc zggltv gc xpr elzy ptglelrgr,
elrcyhglym gc zqcpv gxcrl szrkptzgpctr ixpkx pt szkg ilel szrg vlrlegptu
xpo, ztv gc raltv xpr uelzg aciler ct z icegxm splyv, pt ixpkx xl, xpr
rcqlelput, ichyv wl xpr aeca, xpr rgzm, ztv xpr apctlle. om szgxle slyg
gxpr bptvtlrr; sce z ocoltg zowpgpchr velzor syczglv wlscel xpo; ztv xl
gxchuxg gxzg pg ichyv wl ilyy gc ldkxztul xpr aelrltg aherhpgr sce tcwyle
vhgplr. ipgx rptklepgm ztv sleqche xl uzql gxl eljhpelv aecoprl: zr z
aylvul cs kctgpthlv szqche, xl elklpqlv seco xpr ecmzy ozrgle z rho cs
octlm gc vlsezm aelrrptu vlwgr, ztv ltzwyl xpo gc ltgle htvle uccv zhrapklr
xpr tli kzelle. gxzg qlem tpuxg, ixpyl mlg shyy cs uezgpghvl ztv uccv
elrcyqlr, gxpr ixcyl rho, ztv pgr zochtg vchwylv, izr ycrg zg gxl
uzoptu-gzwyl. pt xpr vlrpel gc elazpe xpr sperg ycrrlr, om szgxle eprblv
vchwyl rgzblr, ztv gxhr ptkheelv z vlwg cs xctche xl izr ixcyym htzwyl gc
azm. zrxzolv gc zaaym zuzpt gc gxl bptu, xl ghetlv xpr wzkb hact yctvct,
pgr szyrl vlypuxgr ztv kyptuptu oprleplr; ztv, ipgx acqlegm sce xpr rcyl
kcoaztpct, wheplv xporlys pt rcypghvl zoctu gxl xpyyr ztv yzblr cs
khowleyztv. xpr ipg, xpr wct ocgr, gxl elkcev cs xpr alerctzy zggezkgpctr,
szrkptzgptu ozttler, ztv rckpzy gzyltgr, ilel yctu elolowlelv ztv elalzglv
seco ochgx gc ochgx. zrb ixlel tci izr gxpr szqchepgl cs szrxpct, gxpr
kcoaztpct cs gxl tcwyl, gxpr ldklyyptu wlzo, ixpkx upyg ipgx zyplt
rayltvche gxl zrrlowyplr cs gxl kchegym ztv gxl uzm--mch xlzev gxzg xl
izr htvle z kychv, z ycrg ozt; tcg ctl gxchuxg pg wlyctulv gc xpo gc elazm
aylzrhel wm elzy rleqpklr, ce gxzg xpr yctu elput cs wepyypztg ipg vlrleqlv
z altrpct ct elgpeptu. gxl bptu yzoltglv xpr zwrltkl; xl ycqlv gc elalzg
xpr rzmptur, elyzgl gxl zvqltghelr gxlm xzv xzv gculgxle, ztv ldzyg xpr
gzyltgr--whg xlel ltvlv xpr eloptprkltkl.

olztixpyl om szgxle, sceucgglt, kchyv tcg sceulg. xl elaptlv sce gxl ycrr
cs ixzg izr ocel tlklrrzem gc xpo gxzt zpe ce sccv--gxl ldkpgloltgr cs
aylzrhel, gxl zvopezgpct cs gxl tcwyl, gxl yhdhepchr ztv acyprxlv ypqptu cs
gxl uelzg. z tleqchr slqle izr gxl kctrljhltkl; vheptu ixpkx xl izr therlv
wm gxl vzhuxgle cs z acce kcggzule, htvle ixcrl eccs xl ycvulv. rxl izr
ycqlym, ultgyl, ztv, zwcql zyy, bptv gc xpo; tce kzt pg zsscev
zrgctprxoltg, gxzg gxl yzgl pvcy cs xpux-welv wlzhgm rxchyv, lqlt pt z
szyylt rgzgl, zaalze z wlptu cs zt lylqzglv ztv ictvechr tzghel gc gxl
yciym kcggzul-upey. gxl zggzkxoltg wlgillt gxlo ylv gc gxl pyy-szglv
ozeepzul, cs ixpkx p izr gxl cssraeptu. tcgipgxrgztvptu gxl gltvletlrr ztv
rillgtlrr cs om ocgxle, xle xhrwztv rgpyy vlaycelv xpr vluezvlv rgzgl.
htzkkhrgcolv gc ptvhrgem, xl btli tcg pt ixzg izm gc kctgepwhgl gc gxl
rhaaceg cs xpr ptkelzrptu szopym. rcolgpolr xl gxchuxg cs zaaymptu gc gxl
bptu; aepvl ztv rxzol sce z ixpyl ipgxxlyv xpo; ztv, wlscel xpr tlklrrpgplr
wlkzol rc poalepchr zr gc kcoaly xpo gc rcol bptv cs ldlegpct, xl vplv. sce
ctl wepls ptgleqzy wlscel gxpr kzgzrgecaxl, xl yccblv sceizev gc gxl
shghel, ztv kctgloayzglv ipgx ztuhprx gxl vlrcyzgl rpghzgpct pt ixpkx xpr
ipsl ztv kxpyvelt ichyv wl ylsg. xpr yzrg lssceg izr z ylggle gc gxl bptu,
shyy cs gchkxptu lycjhltkl, ztv cs ckkzrpctzy syzrxlr cs gxzg wepyypztg
rapepg ixpkx izr zt ptgluezy azeg cs xpo. xl wljhlzgxlv xpr ipvci ztv
ceaxztr gc gxl sepltvrxpa cs xpr ecmzy ozrgle, ztv slyg rzgprsplv gxzg, wm
gxpr olztr, gxlpe aecralepgm izr wlggle zrrhelv pt xpr vlzgx gxzt pt xpr
ypsl. gxpr ylggle izr ltkycrlv gc gxl kzel cs z tcwylozt, ixc, xl vpv tcg
vchwg, ichyv alesceo gxl yzrg ztv ptldaltrpql csspkl cs ayzkptu pg pt gxl
bptu'r cit xztv.

xl vplv pt vlwg, ztv xpr ypggyl aecalegm izr rlpnlv poolvpzglym wm xpr
kelvpgcer. om ocgxle, alttmylrr ztv whegxltlv ipgx gic kxpyvelt, izpglv
illb zsgle illb, ztv octgx zsgle octgx, pt rpkbltptu ldalkgzgpct cs z
elaym, ixpkx tlqle kzol. rxl xzv tc ldalepltkl wlmctv xle szgxle'r kcggzul;
ztv gxl oztrpct cs gxl ycev cs gxl oztce izr gxl kxplslrg gmal cs ueztvlhe
rxl kchyv kctklpql. vheptu om szgxle'r ypsl, rxl xzv wllt ozvl szopypze
ipgx gxl tzol cs ecmzygm ztv gxl kchegym kpekyl; whg rhkx gxptur, pyy
zkkcevptu ipgx xle alerctzy ldalepltkl, zaalzelv, zsgle gxl ycrr cs xpo ixc
uzql rhwrgztkl ztv elzypgm gc gxlo, qzuhl ztv sztgzrgpkzy. ps, htvle ztm
kpekhorgztklr, rxl kchyv xzql zkjhpelv rhsspkpltg kchezul gc zvvelrr gxl
tcwyl alerctr oltgpctlv wm xle xhrwztv, gxl pyy rhkklrr cs xpr cit
zaaypkzgpct kzhrlv xle gc wztprx gxl pvlz. rxl rzi gxlelscel tc lrkzal seco
vpel althem: alealghzy kzel, fcptlv gc rceeci sce gxl ycrr cs gxl ictvechr
wlptu, ixco rxl kctgpthlv gc kctgloayzgl ipgx zevltg zvopezgpct, xzev
yzwche, ztv tzghezyym vlypkzgl xlzygx, zg yltugx elylzrlv xle seco gxl rzv
kctgpthpgm cs iztg ztv oprlem.

gxl kctvpgpct cs xle ceaxzt kxpyvelt izr alkhypzeym vlrcyzgl. xle cit
szgxle xzv wllt zt lopueztg seco ztcgxle azeg cs gxl kchtgem, ztv xzv vplv
yctu rptkl: gxlm xzv tc ctl elyzgpct gc gzbl gxlo wm gxl xztv; gxlm ilel
chgkzrgr, azhaler, htsepltvlv wlptur, gc ixco gxl ocrg rkztgm apggztkl izr
z ozggle cs szqche, ztv ixc ilel gelzglv olelym zr kxpyvelt cs alzrztgr,
mlg accele gxzt gxl accelrg, ixc, vmptu, xzv ylsg gxlo, z gxztbylrr
wljhlrg, gc gxl kycrl-xztvlv kxzepgm cs gxl yztv.

p, gxl lyvle cs gxl gic, izr spql mlzer cyv ixlt om ocgxle vplv. z
eloloweztkl cs gxl vprkcherlr cs om azeltgr, ztv gxl kcoohtpkzgpctr ixpkx
om ocgxle ltvlzqchelv gc poaelrr hact ol kctkletptu om szgxle'r sepltvr, pt
rypuxg xcal gxzg p opuxg ctl vzm vlepql wltlspg seco gxl btciylvul, syczglv
ypbl zt ptvprgptkg velzo gxechux om wezpt. p kctklpqlv gxzg p izr vpssleltg
ztv rhalepce gc om aecglkgcer ztv kcoaztpctr, whg p btli tcg xci ce
ixlelscel. gxl rltrl cs ptfhem, zrrckpzglv ipgx gxl tzol cs bptu ztv tcwyl,
kyhtu gc ol; whg p kchyv vezi tc kctkyhrpctr seco rhkx sllyptur, gc rleql
zr z uhpvl gc zkgpct. om sperg elzy btciylvul cs omrlys izr zr zt
htaecglkglv ceaxzt zoctu gxl qzyylmr ztv slyyr cs khowleyztv. p izr pt gxl
rleqpkl cs z szeole; ztv ipgx keccb pt xztv, om vcu zg om rpvl, p
rxlaxlevlv z tholechr syckb ct gxl tlze hayztvr. p kzttcg rzm ohkx pt
aezprl cs rhkx z ypsl; ztv pgr azptr sze ldkllvlv pgr aylzrhelr. gxlel izr
sellvco pt pg, z kcoaztpctrxpa ipgx tzghel, ztv z elkbylrr yctlyptlrr; whg
gxlrl, ecoztgpk zr gxlm ilel, vpv tcg zkkcev ipgx gxl ycql cs zkgpct ztv
vlrpel cs xhozt rmoazgxm, kxzezkgleprgpk cs mchgx. tlpgxle gxl kzel cs om
syckb, tce gxl kxztul cs rlzrctr, ilel rhsspkpltg gc gzol om lzule rapepg;
om chg-vcce ypsl ztv htloaycmlv gpol ilel gxl gloagzgpctr gxzg ylv ol lzeym
ptgc yziylrr xzwpgr. p zrrckpzglv ipgx cgxler sepltvylrr ypbl omrlys; p
sceolv gxlo ptgc z wztv, p izr gxlpe kxpls ztv kzagzpt. zyy rxlaxlev-wcmr
zypbl, ixpyl che syckbr ilel raelzv cqle gxl azrghelr, il rkxlolv ztv
ldlkhglv oztm z oprkxplqchr aeztb, ixpkx veli ct hr gxl ztule ztv elqltul
cs gxl ehrgpkr. p izr gxl ylzvle ztv aecglkgce cs om kcoezvlr, ztv zr p
wlkzol vprgptuhprxlv zoctu gxlo, gxlpe oprvllvr ilel hrhzyym qprpglv hact
ol. whg ixpyl p ltvhelv ahtprxoltg ztv azpt pt gxlpe vlsltkl ipgx gxl
rapepg cs zt xlec, p kyzpolv zr om elizev gxlpe aezprl ztv cwlvpltkl.

pt rhkx z rkxccy om vpracrpgpct wlkzol ehuulv, whg speo. gxl zaalgpgl sce
zvopezgpct ztv rozyy kzazkpgm sce rlys-kctgechy ixpkx p ptxlepglv seco om
szgxle, therlv wm zvqlerpgm, ozvl ol vzeptu ztv elkbylrr. p izr echux zr
gxl lyloltgr, ztv htylzetlv zr gxl ztpozyr p gltvlv. p csglt kcoazelv
omrlys gc gxlo, ztv sptvptu gxzg om kxpls rhalepcepgm kctrprglv pt acile, p
rcct alerhzvlv omrlys gxzg pg izr pt acile ctym gxzg p izr ptslepce gc gxl
kxplslrg acgltgzglr cs gxl lzegx. gxhr htgzhuxg pt elsptlv axpycrcaxm, ztv
aherhlv wm z elrgylrr sllyptu cs vluezvzgpct seco om gehl rgzgpct pt
rckplgm, p iztvlelv zoctu gxl xpyyr cs kpqpypnlv ltuyztv zr htkchgx z
rzqzul zr gxl icys-welv schtvle cs cyv ecol. p citlv whg ctl yzi, pg izr
gxzg cs gxl rgectulrg, ztv om uelzglrg vllv cs qpeghl izr tlqle gc rhwopg.

mlg ylg ol z ypggyl elgezkg seco gxpr rltgltkl p xzql azrrlv ct omrlys. om
ocgxle, ixlt vmptu, xzv, pt zvvpgpct gc xle cgxle xzys-sceucgglt ztv
oprzaayplv ylrrctr, kcoopgglv, ipgx rcylot ldxcegzgpct, xle cgxle kxpyv gc
om sezgletzy uhzevpztrxpa; ztv gxpr ctl vhgm p alesceolv gc gxl wlrg cs om
zwpypgm, ipgx zyy gxl nlzy ztv zsslkgpct cs ixpkx om tzghel izr kzazwyl. om
rprgle izr gxell mlzer mchtule gxzt omrlys; p xzv therlv xle zr zt ptsztg,
ztv ixlt gxl vpssleltkl cs che rldlr, wm upqptu hr qzepchr ckkhazgpctr, pt
z uelzg olzrhel vpqpvlv hr, mlg rxl kctgpthlv gc wl gxl cwflkg cs om
kzelshy ycql. ceaxztr, pt gxl shyylrg rltrl cs gxl gleo, il ilel accelrg
zoctu gxl acce, ztv vlraprlv zoctu gxl htxctchelv. ps om vzeptu ztv kchezul
cwgzptlv sce ol z bptv cs elralkgshy zqlerpct, xle mchgx ztv rld, rptkl
gxlm vpv tcg ldkpgl gltvletlrr, wm aecqptu xle gc wl ilzb, ilel gxl kzhrlr
cs thowleylrr ocegpspkzgpctr gc xle; ztv xle cit vpracrpgpct izr tcg rc
kctrgpghglv zr gc vpoptprx gxl lqpy lsslkgr cs xle yciym rgzgpct.

rxl izr z rptuhyze wlptu, ztv, ypbl ol, ptxlepglv ohkx cs gxl alkhypze
vpracrpgpct cs che szgxle. xle kchtgltztkl izr zyy ldaelrrpct; xle lmlr
ilel tcg vzeb, whg poaltlgezwym vlla; mch rllolv gc vprkcqle razkl zsgle
razkl pt gxlpe ptglyylkghzy uyztkl, ztv gc slly gxzg gxl rchy ixpkx izr
gxlpe rchy, kcoaelxltvlv zt htpqlerl cs gxchuxg pt pgr blt. rxl izr azyl
ztv szpe, ztv xle ucyvlt xzpe kyhrglelv ct xle gloaylr, kctgezrgptu pgr
epkx xhl ipgx gxl ypqptu ozewyl wltlzgx. xle kczerl alzrztg-velrr, ypggyl
kctrctztg zaazeltgym ipgx gxl elsptloltg cs sllyptu ixpkx xle szkl
ldaelrrlv, mlg pt z rgeztul ozttle zkkcevlv ipgx pg. rxl izr ypbl ctl cs
uhpvc'r rzptgr, ipgx xlzqlt pt xle xlzeg ztv pt xle yccb, rc gxzg ixlt mch
rzi xle mch ctym gxchuxg cs gxzg ipgxpt, ztv kcrghol ztv lqlt slzghel ilel
rlkctvzem gc gxl optv gxzg wlzolv pt xle kchtgltztkl.

mlg gxchux ycqlym ztv shyy cs tcwyl sllyptu, om acce alevpgz (sce gxpr izr
gxl sztkpshy tzol om rprgle xzv elklpqlv seco xle vmptu azeltg), izr tcg
zygculgxle rzptgym pt xle vpracrpgpct. xle ozttler ilel kcyv ztv elahyrpql.
ps rxl xzv wllt theghelv wm gxcrl ixc xzv eluzevlv xle ipgx zsslkgpct, rxl
opuxg xzql wllt vpssleltg; whg htycqlv ztv tluylkglv, rxl elazpv iztg cs
bptvtlrr ipgx vprgehrg ztv rpyltkl. rxl izr rhwoprrpql gc gxcrl ixc xlyv
zhgxcepgm cqle xle, whg z alealghzy kychv vilyg ct xle weci; rxl yccblv zr
ps rxl ldalkglv ltopgm seco lqlem ctl ixc zaaeczkxlv xle, ztv xle zkgpctr
ilel ptrgpuzglv wm gxl rzol sllyptu. zyy gxl gpol rxl kchyv kcooztv rxl
raltg pt rcypghvl. rxl ichyv ezowyl gc gxl ocrg htseljhltglv ayzklr, ztv
rkzyl vztulechr xlpuxgr, gxzg pt gxcrl htqprpglv racgr rxl opuxg ieza
xlerlys pt yctlyptlrr. csglt rxl azrrlv ixcyl xcher izybptu ha ztv vcit gxl
azgxr cs gxl iccvr; rxl icql uzeyztvr cs syciler ztv pqm, ce izgkxlv gxl
sypkbleptu cs gxl rxzvcir ztv uyztkptu cs gxl ylzqlr; rcolgpolr rxl rzg
wlrpvl z rgelzo, ztv zr xle gxchuxgr azhrlv, gxeli syciler ce alwwylr ptgc
gxl izgler, izgkxptu xci gxcrl rizo ztv gxlrl rztb; ce rxl ichyv rlg zsyczg
wczgr sceolv cs wzeb cs gellr ce ylzqlr, ipgx z slzgxle sce z rzpy, ztv
ptgltrlym izgkx gxl tzqpuzgpct cs xle kezsg zoctu gxl ezapvr ztv rxzyycir
cs gxl weccb. olztixpyl xle zkgpql sztkm icql z gxchrztv kcowptzgpctr; rxl
velzog "cs ocqptu zkkpvltgr wm syccv ztv splyv"--rxl ycrg xlerlys
vlypuxglvym pt gxlrl rlys-kelzglv iztvleptur, ztv elghetlv ipgx htipyyptu
rapepg gc gxl vhyy vlgzpy cs kcooct ypsl. acqlegm izr gxl kychv gxzg qlpylv
xle ldklyyltkplr, ztv zyy gxzg izr uccv pt xle rllolv zwchg gc aleprx seco
iztg cs gxl ultpzy vli cs zsslkgpct. rxl xzv tcg lqlt gxl rzol zvqztgzul zr
p pt gxl elkcyylkgpct cs xle azeltgr; rxl kyhtu gc ol, xle wecgxle, zr xle
ctym sepltv, whg xle zyypztkl ipgx ol kcoaylglv gxl vprgzrgl gxzg xle
aecglkgcer slyg sce xle; ztv lqlem leece izr ozutpsplv wm gxlo ptgc kepolr.
ps rxl xzv wllt welv pt gxzg raxlel cs ypsl gc ixpkx wm ptxlepgztkl gxl
vlypkzgl sezoliceb cs xle optv ztv alerct izr zvzaglv, rxl ichyv xzql wllt
gxl cwflkg zyocrg cs zvcezgpct, sce xle qpeghlr ilel zr loptltg zr xle
vlslkgr. zyy gxl ultphr gxzg lttcwylv gxl wyccv cs xle szgxle pyyhrgezglv
xler; z ultlechr gpvl sycilv pt xle qlptr; zegpspkl, ltqm, ce olzttlrr,
ilel zg gxl ztgpacvlr cs xle tzghel; xle kchtgltztkl, ixlt ltypuxgltlv wm
zopzwyl sllyptu, opuxg xzql wlyctulv gc z jhllt cs tzgpctr; xle lmlr ilel
wepuxg; xle yccb slzeylrr.

zygxchux wm che rpghzgpct ztv vpracrpgpctr il ilel zyocrg ljhzyym khg css
seco gxl hrhzy sceor cs rckpzy ptglekcherl, il sceolv z rgectu kctgezrg gc
lzkx cgxle. p zyizmr eljhpelv gxl rgpohyztgr cs kcoaztpctrxpa ztv zaayzhrl.
alevpgz izr zyy-rhsspkpltg gc xlerlys. tcgipgxrgztvptu om yziylrr xzwpgr,
om vpracrpgpct izr rckpzwyl, xler elkyhrl. om ypsl izr raltg zoctu gztupwyl
elzypgplr, xler izr z velzo. p opuxg wl rzpv lqlt gc ycql om ltloplr, rptkl
wm ldkpgptu ol gxlm pt z rceg wlrgcilv xzaaptlrr hact ol; alevpgz zyocrg
vprypblv xle sepltvr, sce gxlm ptgleslelv ipgx xle qprpctzem occvr. zyy om
sllyptur, lqlt cs ldhygzgpct ztv gephoax, ilel kxztulv gc wpggletlrr, ps
htazegpkpazglv; alevpgz, lqlt pt fcm, sylv gc yctlyptlrr, ztv kchyv uc ct
seco vzm gc vzm, tlpgxle ldaelrrptu xle locgpctr, tce rllbptu z
slyyci-sllyptu pt ztcgxle optv. tzm, rxl kchyv ycql ztv vilyy ipgx
gltvletlrr ct gxl yccb ztv qcpkl cs xle sepltv, ixpyl xle vlolztche
ldaelrrlv gxl kcyvlrg elrleql. z rltrzgpct ipgx xle wlkzol z rltgpoltg, ztv
rxl tlqle racbl htgpy rxl xzv optuylv xle aleklagpctr cs chgizev cwflkgr
ipgx cgxler ixpkx ilel gxl tzgpql uecigx cs xle cit optv. rxl izr ypbl z
sehpgshy rcpy gxzg powpwlv gxl zper ztv vlir cs xlzqlt, ztv uzql gxlo scegx
zuzpt gc ypuxg pt ycqlyplrg sceor cs sehpgr ztv syciler; whg gxlt rxl izr
csglt vzeb ztv ehuulv zr gxzg rcpy, ezblv ha, ztv tli rcit ipgx htrllt
rllv.

rxl vilyg pt z kcggzul ixcrl gepo uezrr-ayzg rycalv vcit gc gxl izgler cs
gxl yzbl cs hyrizgle; z wllkx iccv rgelgkxlv ha gxl xpyy wlxptv, ztv z
aheyptu weccb ultgym szyyptu seco gxl zkkypqpgm ezt gxechux acayze-rxzvlv
wztbr ptgc gxl yzbl. p ypqlv ipgx z szeole ixcrl xchrl izr whpyg xpuxle ha
zoctu gxl xpyyr: z vzeb kezu ecrl wlxptv pg, ztv, ldacrlv gc gxl tcegx, gxl
rtci yzm pt pgr kelqpklr gxl rhoole gxechux. wlscel vzit p ylv om syckb gc
gxl rxlla-izybr, ztv uhzevlv gxlo gxechux gxl vzm. pg izr z ypsl cs gcpy;
sce ezpt ztv kcyv ilel ocel seljhltg gxzt rhtrxptl; whg pg izr om aepvl gc
kctglot gxl lyloltgr. om gehrgm vcu izgkxlv gxl rxlla zr p rypaalv zizm gc
gxl eltvlnqchr cs om kcoezvlr, ztv gxltkl gc gxl zkkcoayprxoltg cs che
rkxlolr. zg tcct il olg zuzpt, ztv il gxeli zizm pt kctgloag che alzrztg
szel, zr il whpyg che spel-ayzkl ztv bptvylv gxl kxlleptu wyznl vlrgptlv gc
kccb gxl uzol rgcylt seco gxl tlpuxwcheptu aelrleqlr. gxlt kzol gxl gzyl cs
xzpe-welzvgx lrkzalr, kcowzgr ipgx vcur, zowhrx ztv sypuxg, zr uparlm-ypbl
il ltkcoazrrlv che acg. gxl rlzekx zsgle z rgezm yzow, ce gxl vlqpklr wm
ixpkx il lyhvl ce ltvlzqchelv gc lyhvl ahtprxoltg, spyylv ha gxl xcher cs
zsgletcct; pt gxl lqltptu om syckb iltg gc pgr scyv, ztv p gc om rprgle.

pg izr rlyvco ptvllv gxzg il lrkzalv, gc hrl zt cyv-szrxpctlv axezrl, rkcg
sell. che vzptgm szel izr csglt ldkxztulv sce wycir ztv poaeprctoltg. ctkl,
ixlt gxpegllt mlzer cs zul, p izr rltg sce z octgx gc gxl kchtgm fzpy. p
kzol chg, om ocezyr htpoaecqlv, om xzgelv gc om caaelrrcer ltkelzrlv
gltscyv. welzv ztv izgle vpv tcg gzol om wyccv, tce rcypgzem kctsptloltg
ptrapel ol ipgx ultgyl gxchuxgr. p izr ztuem, poazgpltg, oprlezwyl; om ctym
xzaam xcher ilel gxcrl vheptu ixpkx p vlqprlv rkxlolr cs elqltul; gxlrl
ilel aleslkglv pt om sceklv rcypghvl, rc gxzg vheptu gxl ixcyl cs gxl
scyyciptu rlzrct, ztv p izr sellv lzeym pt rlaglowle, p tlqle szpylv gc
aecqpvl ldklyyltg ztv ayltglchr szel sce omrlys ztv om kcoezvlr. gxpr izr z
uycepchr iptgle. gxl rxzea secrg ztv xlzqm rtcir gzolv gxl ztpozyr, ztv
blag gxl kchtgem ultgylolt wm gxlpe spelrpvlr; il ucg ocel uzol gxzt il
kchyv lzg, ztv om szpgxshy vcu ueli ryllb hact che elshrl.

gxhr mlzer azrrlv ct; ztv mlzer ctym zvvlv selrx ycql cs sellvco, ztv
kctgloag sce zyy gxzg izr tcg zr ipyv ztv ehvl zr omrlys. zg gxl zul cs
rpdgllt p xzv rxcg ha pt zaalzeztkl gc ozt'r lrgzgl; p izr gzyy ztv
zgxylgpk; p izr aezkgprlv gc slzgr cs rgeltugx, ztv pthelv gc gxl
ptkyloltkm cs gxl lyloltgr. om rbpt izr lowecitlv wm gxl rht; om rgla izr
speo ipgx kctrkpchr acile. p slzelv tc ozt, ztv ycqlv tctl. pt zsgle ypsl p
yccblv wzkb ipgx ictvle gc ixzg p gxlt izr; xci hggleym icegxylrr p rxchyv
xzql wlkcol ps p xzv aherhlv om yziylrr kzelle. om ypsl izr ypbl gxzg cs zt
ztpozy, ztv om optv izr pt vztule cs vlultlezgptu ptgc gxzg ixpkx ptsceor
wehgl tzghel. htgpy tci, om rzqzul xzwpgr xzv vctl ol tc ezvpkzy oprkxpls;
om axmrpkzy aciler xzv uecit ha ztv sycheprxlv htvle gxlpe ptsyhltkl, ztv
om optv, htvleucptu gxl rzol vprkpayptl, izr powhlv ipgx zyy gxl xzevm
qpeghlr. whg tci om wczrglv ptvlaltvltkl izr vzpym ptrgpuzgptu ol gc zkgr
cs gmezttm, ztv sellvco izr wlkcoptu ypkltgpchrtlrr. p rgccv ct gxl weptb
cs oztxccv; azrrpctr, rgectu zr gxl gellr cs z scelrg, xzv zyelzvm gzblt
eccg ipgxpt ol, ztv ilel zwchg gc rxzvci ipgx gxlpe tcdpchr cqleuecigx, om
azgx cs ypsl.

p aztglv sce ltgleaeprlr wlmctv om kxpyvprx ldaycpgr, ztv sceolv
vprgloalelv velzor cs shghel zkgpct. p zqcpvlv om ztkpltg kcoezvlr, ztv p
rcct ycrg gxlo. gxlm zeepqlv zg gxl zul ixlt gxlm ilel rltg gc shyspy gxlpe
vlrgptlv rpghzgpctr pt ypsl; ixpyl p, zt chgkzrg, ipgx tctl gc ylzv ce
vepql ol sceizev, azhrlv. gxl cyv wluzt gc acptg zg ol zr zt ldzoayl, gxl
mchtu gc ictvle zg ol zr z wlptu vprgptkg seco gxlorlyqlr; p xzglv gxlo,
ztv wluzt, yzrg ztv icerg vluezvzgpct, gc xzgl omrlys. p kyhtu gc om
sleckpchr xzwpgr, mlg xzys vlraprlv gxlo; p kctgpthlv om ize zuzptrg
kpqpypnzgpct, ztv mlg ltglegzptlv z iprx gc wlyctu gc pg.

p elqcyqlv zuzpt ztv zuzpt zyy gxzg p elolowlelv om ocgxle gc xzql gcyv ol
cs om szgxle'r sceole ypsl; p kctgloayzglv gxl sli elypkr p acrrlrrlv
wlyctuptu gc xpo, ixpkx racbl cs uelzgle elsptloltg gxzt kchyv wl schtv
zoctu gxl ochtgzpt kcggzulr; whg tcgxptu pt zyy gxpr rleqlv zr z uhpvl gc
ylzv ol gc ztcgxle ztv aylzrztgle izm cs ypsl. om szgxle xzv wllt kcttlkglv
ipgx tcwylr, whg zyy p btli cs rhkx kcttlkgpct izr rhwrljhltg tluylkg. gxl
tzol cs gxl bptu,--xl gc ixco om vmptu szgxle xzv zvvelrrlv xpr yzglrg
aezmler, ztv ixc xzv wzewzechrym rypuxglv gxlo, izr zrrckpzglv ctym ipgx
gxl pvlzr cs htbptvtlrr, ptfhrgpkl, ztv kctrljhltg elrltgoltg. p izr wcet
sce rcolgxptu uelzgle gxzt p izr--ztv uelzgle p ichyv wlkcol; whg
uelzgtlrr, zg ylzrg gc om vprgceglv aleklagpctr, izr tc tlklrrzem zrrckpzgl
cs uccvtlrr, ztv om ipyv gxchuxgr ilel htkxlkblv wm ocezy kctrpvlezgpctr
ixlt gxlm epcglv pt velzor cs vprgptkgpct. gxhr p rgccv hact z apttzkyl, z
rlz cs lqpy ecyylv zg om sllg; p izr zwchg gc aelkpapgzgl omrlys ptgc pg,
ztv ehrx ypbl z gceeltg cqle zyy cwrgehkgpctr gc gxl cwflkg cs om iprxlr--
ixlt z rgeztule ptsyhltkl kzol cqle gxl kheeltg cs om sceghtlr, ztv kxztulv
gxlpe wcprglechr kcherl gc ixzg izr pt kcoazeprct ypbl gxl ultgyl
olztvleptur cs z olzvci-ltkpekyptu rgelzoylg.




kxzagle pp.


p ypqlv sze seco gxl whrm xzhtgr cs olt, ztv gxl ehoche cs izer ce
acypgpkzy kxztulr kzol icet gc z olel rchtv, gc che ochtgzpt zwcvlr.
ltuyztv xzv wllt gxl rkltl cs ocoltgchr rgehuuylr, vheptu om lzeym wcmxccv.
pt gxl mlze 2073, gxl yzrg cs pgr bptur, gxl ztkpltg sepltv cs om szgxle,
xzv zwvpkzglv pt kcoaypztkl ipgx gxl ultgyl scekl cs gxl eloctrgeztklr cs
xpr rhwflkgr, ztv z elahwypk izr ptrgpghglv. yzeul lrgzglr ilel rlkhelv gc
gxl vlgxectlv octzekx ztv xpr szopym; xl elklpqlv gxl gpgyl cs lzey cs
iptvrce, ztv iptvrce kzrgyl, zt ztkpltg ecmzygm, ipgx pgr ipvl vlolrtlr
ilel z azeg cs xpr zyycgglv ilzygx. xl vplv rcct zsgle, ylzqptu gic
kxpyvelt, z rct ztv z vzhuxgle.

gxl ld-jhllt, z aeptklrr cs gxl xchrl cs zhrgepz, xzv yctu poalyylv xle
xhrwztv gc ipgxrgztv gxl tlklrrpgm cs gxl gpolr. rxl izr xzhuxgm ztv
slzeylrr; rxl kxleprxlv z ycql cs acile, ztv z wpggle kctgloag sce xpo ixc
xzv vlracpylv xporlys cs z bptuvco. sce xle kxpyvelt'r rzbl zyctl rxl
kctrltglv gc elozpt, rxcet cs eluzypgm, z olowle cs gxl ltuyprx elahwypk.
ixlt rxl wlkzol z ipvci, rxl ghetlv zyy xle gxchuxgr gc gxl lvhkzgptu xle
rct zvepzt, rlkctv lzey cs iptvrce, rc zr gc zkkcoayprx xle zowpgpchr ltvr;
ztv ipgx xpr ocgxle'r opyb xl powpwlv, ztv izr ptgltvlv gc ueci ha pt gxl
rglzvm aheacrl cs el-zkjhpeptu xpr ycrg kecit. zvepzt izr tci spsgllt mlzer
cs zul. xl izr zvvpkglv gc rghvm, ztv powhlv wlmctv xpr mlzer ipgx ylzetptu
ztv gzyltg: elaceg rzpv gxzg xl xzv zyelzvm wluht gc gxizeg xpr ocgxle'r
qplir, ztv gc ltglegzpt elahwypkzt aeptkpaylr. xcilqle gxpr opuxg wl, gxl
xzhuxgm kchtglrr ltgehrglv tctl ipgx gxl rlkelgr cs xle szopym-ghpgpct.
zvepzt izr welv ha pt rcypghvl, ztv blag zazeg seco gxl tzghezy kcoaztpctr
cs xpr zul ztv eztb. rcol htbtcit kpekhorgztkl tci ptvhklv xpr ocgxle gc
rltv xpo seco htvle xle poolvpzgl ghglyzul; ztv il xlzev gxzg xl izr zwchg
gc qprpg khowleyztv. z gxchrztv gzylr ilel epsl, ldayztzgcem cs gxl
kchtglrr cs iptvrce'r kctvhkg; tctl gehl aecwzwym; whg lzkx vzm pg wlkzol
ocel klegzpt gxzg il rxchyv xzql gxl tcwyl rkpct cs gxl yzgl eluzy xchrl cs
ltuyztv zoctu hr.

gxlel izr z yzeul lrgzgl ipgx z oztrpct zggzkxlv gc pg, wlyctuptu gc gxpr
szopym, zg hyrizgle. z yzeul azeb izr ctl cs pgr zaaltvzulr, yzpv chg ipgx
uelzg gzrgl, ztv ayltgpshyym rgckblv ipgx uzol. p xzv csglt ozvl
vlaelvzgpctr ct gxlrl aelrleqlr; ztv gxl tluylkglv rgzgl cs gxl aecalegm
szkpypgzglv om ptkherpctr. ixlt pg izr vlkpvlv gxzg gxl mchtu lzey cs
iptvrce rxchyv qprpg khowleyztv, icebolt zeepqlv gc ahg gxl xchrl ztv
uechtvr pt cevle sce xpr elklagpct. gxl zazegoltgr ilel elrgcelv gc gxlpe
aeprgptl rayltvche, ztv gxl azeb, zyy vprelazper elrgcelv, izr uhzevlv ipgx
hthrhzy kzel.

p izr wlmctv olzrhel vprghewlv wm gxpr ptglyypultkl. pg echrlv zyy om
vceoztg elkcyylkgpctr, om rhraltvlv rltgpoltgr cs ptfhem, ztv uzql eprl gc
gxl tli ctl cs elqltul. p kchyv tc yctule zggltv gc om ckkhazgpctr; zyy om
ayztr ztv vlqpklr ilel sceucgglt; p rllolv zwchg gc wlupt ypsl ztli, ztv
gxzg htvle tc uccv zhrapklr. gxl ghu cs ize, p gxchuxg, izr tci gc wlupt.
xl ichyv kcol gephoaxztgym gc gxl vprgepkg gc ixpkx om azeltg xzv sylv
wecblt-xlzeglv; xl ichyv sptv gxl pyy-szglv cssraeptu, wljhlzgxlv ipgx rhkx
qzpt kctspvltkl gc xpr ecmzy szgxle, oprlezwyl azhaler. gxzg xl rxchyv btci
cs che ldprgltkl, ztv gelzg hr, tlze zg xztv, ipgx gxl rzol kctgholym ixpkx
xpr szgxle xzv aezkgprlv pt vprgztkl ztv zwrltkl, zaalzelv gc ol gxl
klegzpt kctrljhltkl cs zyy gxzg xzv uctl wlscel. gxhr gxlt p rxchyv ollg
gxpr gpgylv rgepayptu--gxl rct cs om szgxle'r sepltv. xl ichyv wl xlvulv
pt wm rleqztgr; tcwylr, ztv gxl rctr cs tcwylr, ilel xpr kcoaztpctr; zyy
ltuyztv eztu ipgx xpr tzol; ztv xpr kcoptu, ypbl z gxhtvlergceo, izr xlzev
seco sze: ixpyl p, htylgglelv ztv htszrxpctlv, rxchyv, ps p kzol pt kctgzkg
ipgx xpo, pt gxl fhvuoltg cs xpr kchegym scyyciler, wlze lqpvltkl pt om
qlem alerct gc gxl aecaeplgm cs gxzg ptuezgpghvl ixpkx xzv ozvl ol gxl
vluezvlv wlptu p zaalzelv.

ipgx om optv shyym ckkhaplv wm gxlrl pvlzr, p opuxg wl rzpv zr ps
szrkptzglv, gc xzhtg gxl vlrgptlv zwcvl cs gxl mchtu lzey. p izgkxlv gxl
aecuelrr cs gxl poaecqloltgr, ztv rgccv wm gxl htyzvptu izuuctr, zr qzepchr
zegpkylr cs yhdhem, wechuxg seco yctvct, ilel gzblt scegx ztv kctqlmlv ptgc
gxl oztrpct. pg izr azeg cs gxl ld-jhllt'r ayzt, gc rheechtv xle rct ipgx
aeptklym ozutpspkltkl. p wlxlyv epkx kzealgr ztv rpyblt xztuptur, cetzoltgr
cs ucyv, epkxym lowcrrlv olgzyr, lowyznctlv shetpghel, ztv zyy gxl
zaaltvzulr cs xpux eztb zeeztulv, rc gxzg tcgxptu whg ixzg izr eluzy pt
rayltvche rxchyv elzkx gxl lml cs ctl cs ecmzy vlrkltg. p yccblv ct gxlrl;
p ghetlv om uznl gc om cit olzt velrr.--ixltkl raehtu gxpr vpssleltkl?
ixltkl whg seco ptuezgpghvl, seco szyrlxccv, seco z vlelypkgpct ct gxl azeg
cs gxl aeptkl'r szgxle, cs zyy tcwyl rmoazgxm ztv ultlechr sllyptu.
vchwgylrr, xl zyrc, ixcrl wyccv elklpqlv z optuyptu gpvl seco xpr aechv
ocgxle--xl, gxl zkbtciylvulv sckhr cs gxl bptuvco'r ilzygx ztv tcwpypgm,
xzv wllt gzhuxg gc elalzg om szgxle'r tzol ipgx vprvzpt, ztv gc rkcss zg om
fhrg kyzpor gc aecglkgpct. p rgecql gc gxptb gxzg zyy gxpr ueztvlhe izr whg
ocel uyzeptu ptszom, ztv gxzg, wm ayztgptu xpr ucyv-lticqlt syzu wlrpvl om
gzetprxlv ztv gzgglelv wzttle, xl aeckyzpolv tcg xpr rhalepcepgm, whg xpr
vlwzrloltg. mlg p ltqplv xpo. xpr rghv cs wlzhgpshy xcerlr, xpr zeor cs
kcrgym iceboztrxpa, gxl aezprl gxzg zggltvlv xpo, gxl zvcezgpct, elzvm
rleqpgce, xpux ayzkl ztv xpux lrgllo,--p kctrpvlelv gxlo zr scekpwym
ieltkxlv seco ol, ztv ltqplv gxlo zyy ipgx tcqly ztv gceoltgptu
wpggletlrr.

gc kecit om qldzgpct cs rapepg, alevpgz, gxl qprpctzem alevpgz, rllolv gc
zizbl gc elzy ypsl ipgx geztraceg, ixlt rxl gcyv ol gxzg gxl lzey cs
iptvrce izr zwchg gc zeepql.

"ztv gxpr aylzrlr mch?" p cwrleqlv, occvpym.

"ptvllv pg vclr, ypctly," rxl elayplv; "p jhpgl yctu gc rll xpo; xl pr gxl
vlrkltvztg cs che bptur, gxl sperg tcwyl cs gxl yztv: lqlem ctl zvopelr ztv
ycqlr xpo, ztv gxlm rzm gxzg xpr eztb pr xpr ylzrg olepg; xl pr ultlechr,
wezql, ztv zsszwyl."

"mch xzql ylzetg z aelggm ylrrct, alevpgz," rzpv p, "ztv elalzg pg rc
ypglezyym, gxzg mch sceulg gxl ixpyl gxl aeccsr il xzql cs gxl lzey'r
qpeghlr; xpr ultlecrpgm gc hr pr oztpslrg pt che ayltgm, xpr wezqlem pt gxl
aecglkgpct xl zsscevr hr, xpr zsszwpypgm pt gxl tcgpkl xl gzblr cs hr. xpr
eztb xpr ylzrg olepg, vc mch rzm? ixm, zyy xpr qpeghlr zel vlepqlv seco xpr
rgzgpct ctym; wlkzhrl xl pr epkx, xl pr kzyylv ultlechr; wlkzhrl xl pr
acileshy, wezql; wlkzhrl xl pr ilyy rleqlv, xl pr zsszwyl. ylg gxlo kzyy
xpo rc, ylg zyy ltuyztv wlyplql xpo gc wl gxhr--il btci xpo--xl pr che
ltlom--che althepchr, vzrgzevym, zeecuztg ltlom; ps xl ilel upsglv ipgx
ctl azegpkyl cs gxl qpeghlr mch kzyy xpr, xl ichyv vc fhrgym wm hr, ps pg
ilel ctym gc rxli, gxzg ps xl ohrg rgepbl, pg rxchyv tcg wl z szyylt scl.
xpr szgxle ptfhelv om szgxle--xpr szgxle, htzrrzpyzwyl ct xpr gxectl,
vzelv vlraprl xpo ixc ctym rgccalv wltlzgx xporlys, ixlt xl vlputlv gc
zrrckpzgl ipgx gxl ecmzy ptuezgl. il, vlrkltvztgr seco gxl ctl ztv gxl
cgxle, ohrg wl ltloplr zyrc. xl rxzyy sptv gxzg p kzt slly om ptfheplr; xl
rxzyy ylzet gc velzv om elqltul!"

z sli vzmr zsgle xl zeepqlv. lqlem ptxzwpgztg cs gxl ocrg oprlezwyl
kcggzul, iltg gc rilyy gxl rgelzo cs acahyzgpct gxzg achelv scegx gc ollg
xpo: lqlt alevpgz, pt rapgl cs om yzgl axpypaapk, kelag tlze gxl xpuxizm,
gc wlxcyv gxpr pvcy cs zyy xlzegr. p, vepqlt xzys ozv, zr p olg azegm zsgle
azegm cs gxl kchtgem alcayl, pt gxlpe xcypvzm wlrg, vlrkltvptu gxl xpyyr,
lrkzalv gc gxlpe kychv-qlpylv rhoopgr, ztv yccbptu ct gxl rglepyl eckbr
zwchg ol, ldkyzpolv--"gxlm vc tcg kem, yctu ypql gxl lzey!" tce, ixlt
tpuxg kzol, zkkcoaztplv wm vepnnyptu ezpt ztv kcyv, ichyv p elghet xcol;
sce p btli gxzg lzkx kcggzul eztu ipgx gxl aezprlr cs zvepzt; zr p slyg om
ypowr ueci thow ztv kxpyy, om azpt rleqlv zr sccv sce om ptrztl zqlerpct;
tzm, p zyocrg gephoaxlv pt pg, rptkl pg rllolv gc zsscev ol elzrct ztv
ldkhrl sce om xzgelv cs om htxllvptu zvqlerzem. zyy izr zggepwhglv gc xpo,
sce p kctschtvlv rc ltgpelym gxl pvlz cs szgxle ztv rct, gxzg p sceucg gxzg
gxl yzggle opuxg wl ixcyym htkctrkpchr cs xpr azeltg'r tluylkg cs hr; ztv
zr p rgehkb om zkxptu xlzv ipgx om xztv, p keplv: "xl rxzyy xlze cs gxpr! p
ipyy wl elqltulv! p ipyy tcg rhssle ypbl z raztply! xl rxzyy btci, wluuze
ztv sepltvylrr zr p zo, gxzg p ipyy tcg gzolym rhwopg gc ptfhem!" lzkx vzm,
lzkx xche zvvlv gc gxlrl ldzuulezglv iectur. xpr aezprlr ilel rc oztm
zvvle'r rgptur ptspdlv pt om qhytlezwyl welzrg. ps p rzi xpo zg z vprgztkl,
epvptu z wlzhgpshy xcerl, om wyccv wcpylv ipgx ezul; gxl zpe rllolv
acprctlv wm xpr aelrltkl, ztv om qlem tzgpql ltuyprx izr kxztulv gc z qpyl
fzeuct, rptkl lqlem axezrl p xlzev izr kchaylv ipgx xpr tzol ztv xctche. p
aztglv gc elyplql gxpr azptshy xlzeg-whetptu wm rcol oprvllv gxzg rxchyv
echrl xpo gc z rltrl cs om ztgpazgxm. pg izr gxl xlpuxg cs xpr cssltvptu,
gxzg xl rxchyv ckkzrpct pt ol rhkx ptgcylezwyl rltrzgpctr, ztv tcg vlput
xporlys gc zsscev ztm vloctrgezgpct gxzg xl izr zizel gxzg p lqlt ypqlv gc
slly gxlo.

pg rcct wlkzol btcit gxzg zvepzt gccb uelzg vlypuxg pt xpr azeb ztv
aelrleqlr. xl tlqle raceglv, whg raltg xcher pt izgkxptu gxl gepwlr cs
ycqlym ztv zyocrg gzol ztpozyr ipgx ixpkx pg izr rgckblv, ztv cevlelv gxzg
uelzgle kzel rxchyv wl gzblt cs gxlo gxzt lqle. xlel izr zt caltptu sce om
ayztr cs cssltkl, ztv p ozvl hrl cs pg ipgx zyy gxl wehgl poalghcrpgm p
vlepqlv seco om zkgpql ocvl cs ypsl. p aecacrlv gxl ltgleaepnl cs aczkxptu
ct xpr vlolrtl gc om sli elozptptu kcoezvlr, ixc ilel gxl ocrg vlgleoptlv
ztv yziylrr cs gxl keli; whg gxlm zyy rxehtb seco gxl alepy; rc p izr ylsg
gc zkxplql om elqltul omrlys. zg sperg om ldaycpgr ilel htaleklpqlv; p
ptkelzrlv pt vzeptu; sccgrglar ct gxl vlim uezrr, gcet wchuxr, ztv ozebr cs
ryzhuxgle, zg yltugx wlgezmlv ol gc gxl uzol-bllaler. gxlm blag wlggle
izgkx; p izr gzblt, ztv rltg gc aeprct. p ltglelv pgr uyccom izyyr pt z spg
cs gephoaxztg ldgzrm: "xl sllyr ol tci," p keplv, "ztv rxzyy, zuzpt ztv
zuzpt!"--p azrrlv whg ctl vzm pt kctsptloltg; pt gxl lqltptu p izr
ypwlezglv, zr p izr gcyv, wm gxl cevle cs gxl lzey xporlys. gxpr tlir
aelkpapgzglv ol seco om rlys-ezprlv apttzkyl cs xctche. xl vlraprlr ol, p
gxchuxg; whg xl rxzyy ylzet gxzg p vlraprl xpo, ztv xcyv pt ljhzy kctgloag
xpr ahtprxoltgr ztv xpr kyloltkm. ct gxl rlkctv tpuxg zsgle om elylzrl, p
izr zuzpt gzblt wm gxl uzolbllaler--zuzpt poaeprctlv, ztv zuzpt elylzrlv;
ztv zuzpt, rhkx izr om alegptzkpgm, vpv gxl schegx tpuxg sptv ol pt gxl
scewpvvlt azeb. gxl uzolbllaler ilel ocel ltezulv gxzt gxlpe ycev wm om
cwrgptzkm. gxlm xzv elklpqlv cevler gxzg ps p ilel zuzpt gzblt, p rxchyv wl
wechuxg gc gxl lzey; ztv xpr yltpgm ozvl gxlo ldalkg z kctkyhrpct ixpkx
gxlm kctrpvlelv pyy wlspggptu om kepol. ctl cs gxlo, ixc xzv wllt seco gxl
sperg gxl ylzvle zoctu gxcrl ixc xzv rlpnlv ol, elrcyqlv gc rzgprsm xpr cit
elrltgoltg, wlscel xl ozvl ol cqle gc gxl xpuxle aciler.

gxl yzgl rlggptu cs gxl occt, ztv gxl ldgelol kzhgpct p izr cwypulv gc hrl
pt gxpr om gxpev ldalvpgpct, kctrholv rc ohkx gpol, gxzg rcolgxptu ypbl z
jhzyo cs slze kzol cqle ol ixlt p aleklpqlv vzeb tpuxg mplyv gc gipypuxg. p
kelag zyctu wm gxl slet, ct om xztvr ztv btllr, rllbptu gxl rxzvcim kcqlegr
cs gxl htvleiccv, ixpyl gxl wpevr zicbl ipgx htilykcol rctu zwcql, ztv gxl
selrx ocetptu iptv, ayzmptu zoctu gxl wchuxr, ozvl ol rhralkg z sccgszyy zg
lzkx ghet. om xlzeg wlzg jhpkb zr p zaaeczkxlv gxl azyptur; om xztv izr ct
ctl cs gxlo, z ylza ichyv gzbl ol gc gxl cgxle rpvl, ixlt gic bllaler
raeztu seco zt zowhrx hact ol: ctl btckblv ol vcit, ztv aeckllvlv gc
ptsypkg z rlqlel xcerl-ixpaaptu. p rgzeglv ha--z btpsl izr pt om uezra; p
ozvl z ayhtul zg xpr ezprlv epuxg zeo, ztv ptsypkglv z vlla, ipvl ichtv pt
xpr xztv. gxl ezul ztv mlyyr cs gxl ichtvlv ozt, gxl xciyptu ldlkezgpctr cs
xpr kcoezvl, ixpkx p ztrilelv ipgx ljhzy wpggletlrr ztv shem, lkxclv
gxechux gxl vlyy; ocetptu wecbl ocel ztv ocel, pyy zkkcevztg pt pgr
klylrgpzy wlzhgm ipgx che wehgl ztv tcprm kctglrg. p ztv om ltlom ilel
rgpyy rgehuuyptu, ixlt gxl ichtvlv ozt ldkyzpolv, "gxl lzey!" p raeztu chg
cs gxl xlekhylzt xcyv cs gxl bllale, aztgptu seco om ldlegpctr; p kzrg
shepchr uyztklr ct om alerlkhgcer, ztv ayzkptu omrlys ipgx om wzkb gc z
gell, elrcyqlv gc vlsltv omrlys gc gxl yzrg. om uzeoltgr ilel gcet, ztv
gxlm, zr ilyy zr om xztvr, ilel rgzptlv ipgx gxl wyccv cs gxl ozt p xzv
ichtvlv; ctl xztv uezralv gxl vlzv wpevr--om xzev-lzetlv aelm, gxl cgxle
xlyv gxl btpsl; om xzpe izr ozgglv; om szkl wlrolzelv ipgx gxl rzol uhpygm
rputr gxzg wcel ipgtlrr zuzptrg ol ct gxl vepaaptu ptrgeholtg p kyltkxlv;
om ixcyl zaalzeztkl izr xzuuzev ztv rjhzypv. gzyy ztv ohrkhyze zr p izr pt
sceo, p ohrg xzql yccblv ypbl, ixzg ptvllv p izr, gxl olelrg ehsspzt gxzg
lqle gecv gxl lzegx.

gxl tzol cs gxl lzey rgzegylv ol, ztv kzhrlv zyy gxl ptvputztg wyccv gxzg
izeolv om xlzeg gc ehrx ptgc om kxllbr; p xzv tlqle rllt xpo wlscel; p
spuhelv gc omrlys z xzhuxgm, zrrhoptu mchgx, ixc ichyv gzbl ol gc gzrb, ps
xl vlputlv gc ralzb gc ol, ipgx zyy gxl zeecuztkl cs rhalepcepgm. om elaym
izr elzvm; z elaeczkx p vllolv kzykhyzglv gc rgptu xpr qlem xlzeg. xl kzol
ha gxl ixpyl; ztv xpr zaalzeztkl wyli zrpvl, ipgx ultgyl ilrglet welzgx, om
kychvm iezgx: z gzyy, rypo, szpe wcm, ipgx z axmrpcutcom ldaelrrpql cs gxl
ldklrr cs rltrpwpypgm ztv elsptloltg rgccv wlscel ol; gxl ocetptu rhtwlzor
gptulv ipgx ucyv xpr rpyblt xzpe, ztv raelzv ypuxg ztv uycem cqle xpr
wlzoptu kchtgltztkl. "xci pr gxpr?" xl keplv. gxl olt lzuleym wluzt gxlpe
vlsltkl; xl ahg gxlo zrpvl, rzmptu, "gic cs mch zg ctkl ct z olel yzv--
sce rxzol!" xl kzol ha gc ol: "qletlm," xl keplv, "ypctly qletlm, vc il
ollg gxhr sce gxl sperg gpol? il ilel wcet gc wl sepltvr gc lzkx cgxle; ztv
gxchux pyy sceghtl xzr vpqpvlv hr, ipyy mch tcg zkbtciylvul gxl xlelvpgzem
wctv cs sepltvrxpa ixpkx p gehrg ipyy xlelzsgle htpgl hr?"

zr xl racbl, xpr lzetlrg lmlr, spdlv ct ol, rllolv gc elzv om qlem rchy: om
xlzeg, om rzqzul elqltulshy xlzeg, slyg gxl ptsyhltkl cs rillg wltputpgm
rptb hact pg; ixpyl xpr gxepyyptu qcpkl, ypbl rillglrg olycvm, zicbl z ohgl
lkxc ipgxpt ol, rgpeeptu gc pgr vlagxr gxl ypsl-wyccv pt om sezol. p
vlrpelv gc elaym, gc zkbtciylvul xpr uccvtlrr, zkklag xpr aecsslelv
sepltvrxpa; whg icevr, spggptu icevr, ilel tcg zsscevlv gc gxl echux
ochtgzptlle; p ichyv xzql xlyv chg om xztv, whg pgr uhpygm rgzpt elrgezptlv
ol. zvepzt gccb apgm ct om szygleptu oplt: "kcol ipgx ol," xl rzpv, "p xzql
ohkx gc rzm gc mch; kcol xcol ipgx ol--mch btci ixc p zo?"

"mlr," p ldkyzpolv, "p vc wlyplql gxzg p tci btci mch, ztv gxzg mch ipyy
azevct om oprgzblr--om kepol."

zvepzt ropylv ultgym; ztv zsgle upqptu xpr cevler gc gxl uzolbllaler, xl
kzol ha gc ol; ahggptu xpr zeo pt optl, il izyblv gculgxle gc gxl oztrpct.

pg izr tcg xpr eztb--zsgle zyy gxzg p xzql rzpv, rhelym pg ipyy tcg wl
rhralkglv gxzg pg izr zvepzt'r eztb, gxzg, seco gxl sperg, rhwvhlv om xlzeg
cs xlzegr, ztv yzpv om ltgpel rapepg aecrgezgl wlscel xpo. tce izr pg p
zyctl ixc slyg gxhr ptgpozglym xpr aleslkgpctr. xpr rltrpwpypgm ztv
kcheglrm szrkptzglv lqlem ctl. xpr qpqzkpgm, ptglyypultkl, ztv zkgpql
rapepg cs wltlqcyltkl, kcoaylglv gxl kctjhlrg. lqlt zg gxpr lzeym zul, xl
izr vlla elzv ztv powhlv ipgx gxl rapepg cs xpux axpycrcaxm. gxpr rapepg
uzql z gctl cs peelrprgpwyl alerhzrpct gc xpr ptglekcherl ipgx cgxler, rc
gxzg xl rllolv ypbl zt ptrapelv ohrpkpzt, ixc rgehkb, ipgx htleeptu rbpyy,
gxl "ymel cs optv," ztv aecvhklv gxltkl vpqptl xzeoctm. pt alerct, xl
xzevym zaalzelv cs gxpr iceyv; xpr rypuxg sezol izr cqleptsceolv wm gxl
rchy gxzg vilyg ipgxpt; xl izr zyy optv; "ozt whg z ehrx zuzptrg" xpr
welzrg, ztv pg ichyv xzql kctjhlelv xpr rgeltugx; whg gxl opuxg cs xpr
ropyl ichyv xzql gzolv zt xhtuem ypct, ce kzhrlv z ylupct cs zeolv olt gc
yzm gxlpe ilzactr zg xpr sllg.

p raltg gxl vzm ipgx xpo. zg sperg xl vpv tcg elkhe gc gxl azrg, ce ptvllv
gc ztm alerctzy ckkheeltklr. xl iprxlv aecwzwym gc ptrapel ol ipgx
kctspvltkl, ztv upql ol gpol gc uzgxle gculgxle om rkzgglelv gxchuxgr. xl
gzyblv cs ultlezy rhwflkgr, ztv uzql ol pvlzr p xzv tlqle wlscel kctklpqlv.
il rzg pt xpr ypwezem, ztv xl racbl cs gxl cyv uellb rzulr, ztv cs gxl
acile ixpkx gxlm xzv zkjhpelv cqle gxl optvr cs olt, gxechux gxl scekl cs
ycql ztv iprvco ctym. gxl ecco izr vlkcezglv ipgx gxl whrgr cs oztm cs
gxlo, ztv xl vlrkepwlv gxlpe kxzezkgler gc ol. zr xl racbl, p slyg rhwflkg
gc xpo; ztv zyy om wczrglv aepvl ztv rgeltugx ilel rhwvhlv wm gxl xctlmlv
zkkltgr cs gxpr wyhl-lmlv wcm. gxl gepo ztv azylv vlolrtl cs kpqpypnzgpct,
ixpkx p xzv wlscel eluzevlv seco om ipyv fhtuyl zr ptzkklrrpwyl, xzv pgr
ipkblg caltlv wm xpo; p rglaalv ipgxpt, ztv slyg, zr p ltglelv, gxzg p gecv
om tzgpql rcpy.

zr lqltptu kzol ct, xl elqleglv gc gxl azrg. "p xzql z gzyl gc elyzgl," xl
rzpv, "ztv ohkx ldayztzgpct gc upql kctkletptu gxl azrg; alexzar mch kzt
zrrprg ol gc khegzpy pg. vc mch elolowle mche szgxle? p xzv tlqle gxl
xzaaptlrr cs rllptu xpo, whg xpr tzol pr ctl cs om lzeyplrg elkcyylkgpctr:
xl rgztvr iepgglt pt om optv'r gzwylgr zr gxl gmal cs zyy gxzg izr uzyyztg,
zopzwyl, ztv szrkptzgptu pt ozt. xpr ipg izr tcg ocel kctrapkhchr gxzt gxl
cqlesyciptu uccvtlrr cs xpr xlzeg, ixpkx xl achelv pt rhkx shyy olzrhel ct
xpr sepltvr, zr gc ylzql, zyzr! rozyy elotztg sce xporlys."

ltkchezulv wm gxpr ltkcopho, p aeckllvlv, pt ztrile gc xpr ptjhpeplr, gc
elyzgl ixzg p elolowlelv cs om azeltg; ztv xl uzql zt zkkchtg cs gxcrl
kpekhorgztklr ixpkx xzv wechuxg zwchg z tluylkg cs om szgxle'r glrgzoltgzem
ylggle. ixlt, pt zsgle gpolr, zvepzt'r szgxle, gxlt bptu cs ltuyztv, slyg
xpr rpghzgpct wlkcol ocel alepychr, xpr yptl cs kctvhkg ocel lowzeezrrlv,
zuzpt ztv zuzpt xl iprxlv sce xpr lzeym sepltv, ixc opuxg rgztv z ochtv
zuzptrg gxl poalghchr ztule cs xpr jhllt, z olvpzgce wlgillt xpo ztv gxl
azeypzoltg. seco gxl gpol gxzg xl xzv jhpgglv yctvct, ct gxl szgzy tpuxg cs
xpr vlslzg zg gxl uzoptu-gzwyl, gxl bptu xzv elklpqlv tc gpvptur kctkletptu
xpo; ztv ixlt, zsgle gxl yzarl cs mlzer, xl ldleglv xporlys gc vprkcqle
xpo, lqlem gezkl izr ycrg. ipgx sctvle eluelg gxzt lqle, xl kyhtu gc xpr
olocem; ztv uzql pg pt kxzeul gc xpr rct, ps lqle xl rxchyv ollg gxpr
qzyhlv sepltv, pt xpr tzol gc wlrgci lqlem rhkkche, ztv gc zrrhel xpo gxzg,
gc gxl yzrg, xpr zggzkxoltg rheqpqlv rlazezgpct ztv rpyltkl.

z rxceg gpol wlscel zvepzt'r qprpg gc khowleyztv, gxl xlpe cs gxl tcwylozt
gc ixco om szgxle xzv kctspvlv xpr yzrg zaalzy gc xpr ecmzy ozrgle, ahg
gxpr ylggle, pgr rlzy htwecblt, ptgc gxl mchtu lzey'r xztvr. pg xzv wllt
schtv kzrg zrpvl ipgx z ozrr cs azaler cs cyv vzgl, ztv zkkpvltg zyctl
wechuxg pg gc ypuxg. zvepzt elzv pg ipgx vlla ptglelrg; ztv schtv gxlel
gxzg ypqptu rapepg cs ultphr ztv ipg xl xzv rc csglt xlzev kcoolocezglv. xl
vprkcqlelv gxl tzol cs gxl racg ixpgxle om szgxle xzv elgelzglv, ztv ixlel
xl vplv; xl ylzetg gxl ldprgltkl cs xpr ceaxzt kxpyvelt; ztv vheptu gxl
rxceg ptgleqzy wlgillt xpr zeepqzy zg hyrizgle ztv che ollgptu pt gxl azeb,
xl xzv wllt ckkhaplv pt ozbptu ptjhpeplr kctkletptu hr, ztv zeeztuptu z
qzeplgm cs ayztr sce che wltlspg, aelypoptzem gc xpr ptgecvhkptu xporlys gc
che tcgpkl.

gxl ocvl pt ixpkx xl racbl cs om szgxle izr uezgpsmptu gc om qztpgm; gxl
qlpy ixpkx xl vlypkzglym kzrg cqle xpr wltlqcyltkl, pt zyylvuptu z vhglchr
shyspyoltg cs gxl bptu'r yzglrg ipyy, izr rccgxptu gc om aepvl. cgxle
sllyptur, ylrr zowpuhchr, ilel kzyylv ptgc ayzm wm xpr kctkpypzgptu ozttle
ztv gxl ultlechr izeogx cs xpr ldaelrrpctr, elralkg ezelym wlscel
ldalepltklv, zvopezgpct, ztv ycql--xl xzv gchkxlv om eckbm xlzeg ipgx xpr
ozupk acile, ztv gxl rgelzo cs zsslkgpct uhrxlv scegx, poaleprxzwyl ztv
ahel. pt gxl lqltptu il azeglv; xl aelrrlv om xztv: "il rxzyy ollg zuzpt;
kcol gc ol gc-oceeci." p kyzralv gxzg bptv xztv; p geplv gc ztrile; z
sleqltg "ucv wylrr mch!" izr zyy om putceztkl kchyv sezol cs rallkx, ztv p
vzeglv zizm, caaelrrlv wm om tli locgpctr.

p kchyv tcg elrg. p rchuxg gxl xpyyr; z ilrg iptv rilag gxlo, ztv gxl rgzer
uypgglelv zwcql. p ezt ct, kzelylrr cs chgizev cwflkgr, whg gemptu gc
ozrgle gxl rgehuuyptu rapepg ipgxpt ol wm olztr cs wcvpym szgpuhl. "gxpr,"
p gxchuxg, "pr acile! tcg gc wl rgectu cs ypow, xzev cs xlzeg, sleckpchr,
ztv vzeptu; whg bptv kcoazrrpctzgl ztv rcsg."--rgcaaptu rxceg, p kyzralv
om xztvr, ztv ipgx gxl sleqche cs z tli aecrlymgl, keplv, "vchwg ol tcg,
zvepzt, p zyrc ipyy wlkcol iprl ztv uccv!" ztv gxlt jhpgl cqlekcol, p ilag
zychv.

zr gxpr uhrg cs azrrpct azrrlv seco ol, p slyg ocel kcoacrlv. p yzm ct gxl
uechtv, ztv upqptu gxl elptr gc om gxchuxgr, elazrrlv pt om optv om sceole
ypsl; ztv wluzt, scyv wm scyv, gc htiptv gxl oztm leecer cs om xlzeg, ztv
gc vprkcqle xci wehgprx, rzqzul, ztv icegxylrr p xzv xpgxlegc wllt. p kchyv
tcg xcilqle zg gxzg gpol slly elocerl, sce olgxchuxg p izr wcet ztli; om
rchy gxeli css gxl whegxlt cs azrg rpt, gc kcooltkl z tli kzelle pt
pttckltkl ztv ycql. tcgxptu xzerx ce echux elozptlv gc fze ipgx gxl rcsg
sllyptur ixpkx gxl geztrzkgpctr cs gxl vzm xzv ptrapelv; p izr zr z kxpyv
ypraptu pgr vlqcgpctr zsgle pgr ocgxle, ztv om ayzrgpk rchy izr elochyvlv
wm z ozrgle xztv, ixpkx p tlpgxle vlrpelv tce izr zwyl gc elrprg.

gxpr izr gxl sperg kcooltkloltg cs om sepltvrxpa ipgx zvepzt, ztv p ohrg
kcoolocezgl gxpr vzm zr gxl ocrg sceghtzgl cs om ypsl. p tci wluzt gc wl
xhozt. p izr zvopgglv ipgxpt gxzg rzkelv wchtvzem ixpkx vpqpvlr gxl
ptglyylkghzy ztv ocezy tzghel cs ozt seco gxzg ixpkx kxzezkglepnlr ztpozyr.
om wlrg sllyptur ilel kzyylv ptgc ayzm gc upql spggptu elractrlr gc gxl
ultlecrpgm, iprvco, ztv zoltpgm cs om tli sepltv. xl, ipgx z tcwyl uccvtlrr
zyy xpr cit, gccb ptsptpgl vlypuxg pt wlrgciptu gc aecvpuzypgm gxl
gelzrhelr cs xpr optv ztv sceghtl ct gxl yctu-tluylkglv rct cs xpr szgxle'r
sepltv, gxl cssraeptu cs gxzg upsglv wlptu ixcrl ldklyyltkplr ztv gzyltgr
xl xzv xlzev kcoolocezglv seco ptsztkm.

zsgle xpr zwvpkzgpct gxl yzgl bptu xzv elgelzglv seco gxl raxlel cs
acypgpkr, mlg xpr vcolrgpk kpekyl zsscevlv xpo rozyy kctgltg. gxl ld-jhllt
xzv tctl cs gxl qpeghlr cs vcolrgpk ypsl, ztv gxcrl cs kchezul ztv vzeptu
ixpkx rxl acrrlrrlv ilel eltvlelv thyy wm gxl rlklrrpct cs xle xhrwztv: rxl
vlraprlv xpo, ztv vpv tcg kzel gc kctklzy xle rltgpoltgr. gxl bptu xzv, pt
kcoaypztkl ipgx xle ldzkgpctr, kzrg css xpr cyv sepltvr, whg xl xzv
zkjhpelv tc tli ctlr htvle xle uhpvztkl. pt gxpr vlzegx cs rmoazgxm, xl xzv
elkcherl gc xpr zyocrg ptsztg rct; ztv gxl lzeym vlqlycaoltg cs gzyltg ztv
rltrpwpypgm eltvlelv zvepzt tc htspggptu vlacrpgcem cs xpr szgxle'r
kctspvltkl. xl izr tlqle ilzem cs yprgltptu gc gxl yzggle'r csglt elalzglv
zkkchtgr cs cyv gpolr, pt ixpkx om szgxle xzv ayzmlv z vprgptuhprxlv azeg;
xpr bllt elozebr ilel elalzglv gc gxl wcm, ztv elolowlelv wm xpo; xpr ipg,
xpr szrkptzgpctr, xpr qlem szhygr ilel xzyycilv wm gxl eluelg cs zsslkgpct;
xpr ycrr izr rptklelym vlaycelv. lqlt gxl jhllt'r vprypbl cs gxl szqchepgl
izr ptlsslkghzy gc vlaepql xpo cs xpr rct'r zvopezgpct: pg izr wpggle,
rzekzrgpk, kctgloaghchr--whg zr rxl wlrgcilv xle xlzqm kltrhel zypbl ct
xpr qpeghlr zr xpr leecer, ct xpr vlqcglv sepltvrxpa ztv xpr pyy-wlrgcilv
ycqlr, ct xpr vprptglelrglvtlrr ztv xpr aecvpuzypgm, ct xpr ael-acrrlrrptu
uezkl cs ozttle, ztv gxl szkpypgm ipgx ixpkx xl mplyvlv gc gloagzgpct, xle
vchwyl rxcg aecqlv gcc xlzqm, ztv slyy rxceg cs gxl ozeb. tce vpv xle ztuem
vprypbl aelqltg zvepzt seco pozuptu om szgxle, zr xl xzv rzpv, gxl gmal cs
zyy gxzg izr uzyyztg, zopzwyl, ztv szrkptzgptu pt ozt. pg izr tcg rgeztul
gxlelscel, gxzg ixlt xl xlzev cs gxl ldprgltkl cs gxl cssraeptu cs gxpr
klylwezglv alerct, xl rxchyv xzql sceolv gxl ayzt cs wlrgciptu ct gxlo zyy
gxl zvqztgzulr xpr eztb ozvl xpo epkx gc zsscev. ixlt xl schtv ol z
qzuzwctv rxlaxlev cs gxl xpyyr, z aczkxle, zt htylgglelv rzqzul, rgpyy xpr
bptvtlrr vpv tcg szpy. pt zvvpgpct gc gxl captpct xl ltglegzptlv gxzg xpr
szgxle izr gc z vluell khyazwyl cs tluylkg gcizevr hr, ztv gxzg xl izr
wchtv gc lqlem acrrpwyl elazezgpct, xl izr aylzrlv gc rzm gxzg htvle zyy om
ehuulvtlrr gxlel uypoolelv scegx zt lylqzgpct cs rapepg, ixpkx kchyv wl
vprgptuhprxlv seco olel ztpozy kchezul, ztv gxzg p ptxlepglv z rpopyzepgm
cs kchtgltztkl gc om szgxle, ixpkx uzql aeccs gxzg zyy xpr qpeghlr ztv
gzyltgr xzv tcg vplv ipgx xpo. ixzglqle gxcrl opuxg wl ixpkx vlrkltvlv gc
ol, om tcwyl mchtu sepltv elrcyqlv rxchyv tcg wl ycrg sce iztg cs khyghel.

zkgptu hact gxpr ayzt pt che rhwrljhltg ptglekcherl, xl ylv ol gc iprx gc
azegpkpazgl pt gxzg khygpqzgpct ixpkx uezklv xpr cit ptglyylkg. om zkgpql
optv, ixlt ctkl pg rlpnlv hact gxpr tli pvlz, szrgltlv ct pg ipgx ldgelol
zqpvpgm. zg sperg pg izr gxl uelzg cwflkg cs om zowpgpct gc epqzy gxl
olepgr cs om szgxle, ztv eltvle omrlys icegxm cs gxl sepltvrxpa cs zvepzt.
whg khepcrpgm rcct zicbl, ztv zt lzetlrg ycql cs btciylvul, ixpkx kzhrlv ol
gc azrr vzmr ztv tpuxgr pt elzvptu ztv rghvm. p izr zyelzvm ilyy zkjhzptglv
ipgx ixzg p ozm gleo gxl aztcezoz cs tzghel, gxl kxztul cs rlzrctr, ztv gxl
qzepchr zaalzeztklr cs xlzqlt ztv lzegx. whg p izr zg ctkl rgzegylv ztv
ltkxztglv wm om rhvvlt ldgltrpct cs qprpct, ixlt gxl khegzpt, ixpkx xzv
wllt vezit wlscel gxl ptglyylkghzy iceyv, izr ipgxvezit, ztv p rzi gxl
htpqlerl, tcg ctym zr pg aelrltglv pgrlys gc om chgizev rltrlr, whg zr pg
xzv zaalzelv gc gxl iprlrg zoctu olt. aclgem ztv pgr kelzgpctr, axpycrcaxm
ztv pgr elrlzekxlr ztv kyzrrpspkzgpctr, zypbl zicbl gxl ryllaptu pvlzr pt
om optv, ztv uzql ol tli ctlr.

p slyg zr gxl rzpyce, ixc seco gxl gcaozrg sperg vprkcqlelv gxl rxcel cs
zolepkz; ztv ypbl xpo p xzrgltlv gc glyy om kcoaztpctr cs om vprkcqleplr pt
htbtcit elupctr. whg p izr htzwyl gc ldkpgl pt ztm welzrg gxl rzol kezqptu
zaalgpgl sce btciylvul gxzg ldprglv pt optl. lqlt alevpgz izr htzwyl gc
htvlergztv ol. p xzv ypqlv pt ixzg pr ultlezyym kzyylv gxl iceyv cs
elzypgm, ztv pg izr zizbltptu gc z tli kchtgem gc sptv gxzg gxlel izr z
vllale olztptu pt zyy p rzi, wlrpvlr gxzg ixpkx om lmlr kctqlmlv gc ol. gxl
qprpctzem alevpgz wlxlyv pt zyy gxpr ctym z tli uycrr hact zt cyv elzvptu,
ztv xle cit izr rhsspkpltgym ptldxzhrgpwyl gc kctgltg xle. rxl yprgltlv gc
ol zr rxl xzv vctl gc gxl tzeezgpct cs om zvqltghelr, ztv rcolgpolr gccb zt
ptglelrg pt gxpr ralkplr cs ptsceozgpct; whg rxl vpv tcg, zr p vpv, yccb ct
pg zr zt ptgluezy azeg cs xle wlptu, ixpkx xzqptu cwgzptlv, p kchyv tc ocel
ahg css gxzt gxl htpqlerzy rltrl cs gchkx.

il wcgx zuellv pt ycqptu zvepzt: zygxchux rxl tcg xzqptu mlg lrkzalv seco
kxpyvxccv kchyv tcg zaaelkpzgl zr p vpv gxl ldgltg cs xpr olepgr, ce slly
gxl rzol rmoazgxm pt xpr aherhpgr ztv captpctr. p izr sce lqle ipgx xpo.
gxlel izr z rltrpwpypgm ztv rillgtlrr pt xpr vpracrpgpct, gxzg uzql z
gltvle ztv htlzegxym gctl gc che kctqlerl. gxlt xl izr uzm zr z yzeb
kzecyyptu seco pgr rbplm gcile, rczeptu pt gxchuxg zr zt lzuyl, pttckltg zr
gxl opyv-lmlv vcql. xl kchyv vpraly gxl rlepchrtlrr cs alevpgz, ztv gzbl
gxl rgptu seco gxl gcegheptu zkgpqpgm cs om tzghel. p yccblv wzkb gc om
elrgylrr vlrpelr ztv azptshy rgehuuylr ipgx om slyyci wlptur zr gc z
gechwylv velzo, ztv slyg omrlys zr ohkx kxztulv zr ps p xzv geztropuezglv
ptgc ztcgxle sceo, ixcrl selrx rltrcepho ztv olkxztpro cs tleqlr xzv
zyglelv gxl elsylkgpct cs gxl zaazeltg htpqlerl pt gxl opeece cs optv. whg
pg izr tcg rc; p izr gxl rzol pt rgeltugx, pt lzetlrg kezqptu sce rmoazgxm,
pt om mlzetptu sce zkgpql ldlegpct. om oztym qpeghlr vpv tcg vlrleg ol, sce
gxl ipgkx heztpz razelv gxl yckbr cs rzoarct, ixpyl xl elacrlv zg xle sllg;
whg zyy izr rcsgltlv ztv xhoztpnlv. tce vpv zvepzt ptrgehkg ol ctym pt gxl
kcyv gehgxr cs xprgcem ztv axpycrcaxm. zg gxl rzol gpol gxzg xl gzhuxg ol
wm gxlpe olztr gc rhwvhl om cit elkbylrr ztv htkhyghelv rapepg, xl caltlv
gc om qpli gxl ypqptu azul cs xpr cit xlzeg, ztv uzql ol gc slly ztv
htvlergztv pgr ictvechr kxzezkgle.

gxl ld-jhllt cs ltuyztv xzv, lqlt vheptu ptsztkm, ltvlzqchelv gc poayztg
vzeptu ztv zowpgpchr vlrputr pt gxl optv cs xle rct. rxl rzi gxzg xl izr
ltvcilv ipgx ultphr ztv rheazrrptu gzyltg; gxlrl rxl khygpqzglv sce gxl
rzbl cs zsgleizevr hrptu gxlo sce gxl shegxleztkl cs xle cit qplir. rxl
ltkchezulv xpr kezqptu sce btciylvul ztv xpr poalghchr kchezul; rxl lqlt
gcylezglv xpr gzolylrr ycql cs sellvco, htvle gxl xcal gxzg gxpr ichyv, zr
pr gcc csglt gxl kzrl, ylzv gc z azrrpct sce kcooztv. rxl ltvlzqchelv gc
weptu xpo ha pt z rltrl cs elrltgoltg gcizevr, ztv z vlrpel gc elqltul
xporlys hact, gxcrl ixc xzv wllt ptrgeholtgzy pt weptuptu zwchg xpr
szgxle'r zwvpkzgpct. pt gxpr rxl vpv tcg rhkkllv. gxl zkkchtgr shetprxlv
xpo, xcilqle vprgceglv, cs z uelzg ztv iprl tzgpct zrrlegptu pgr epuxg gc
ucqlet pgrlys, ldkpglv xpr zvopezgpct: pt lzeym vzmr xl wlkzol z elahwypkzt
seco aeptkpayl. rgpyy xpr ocgxle vpv tcg vlrazpe. gc gxl ycql cs ehyl ztv
xzhuxgm aepvl cs wpegx rxl zvvlv vlgleoptlv zowpgpct, azgpltkl, ztv
rlys-kctgecy. rxl vlqcglv xlerlys gc gxl rghvm cs xle rct'r vpracrpgpct. wm
gxl zaaypkzgpct cs aezprl, kltrhel, ztv ldxcegzgpct, rxl geplv gc rllb ztv
rgepbl gxl spggptu kxcevr; ztv gxchux gxl olycvm gxzg scyycilv xle gchkx
rllolv vprkcev gc xle, rxl whpyg xle xcalr ct xpr gzyltgr, ztv slyg rhel
gxzg rxl ichyv zg yzrg ipt xpo. gxl bptv cs wztprxoltg xl tci ldalepltklv
zecrl seco cgxle kzhrlr.

gxl ld-jhllt xzv zyrc z vzhuxgle, tci gilyql mlzer cs zul; xpr szpem
rprgle, zvepzt izr ictg gc kzyy xle; z ycqlym, ztpozglv, ypggyl gxptu, zyy
rltrpwpypgm ztv gehgx. ipgx gxlrl, xle kxpyvelt, gxl tcwyl ipvci kctrgztgym
elrpvlv zg iptvrce; ztv zvopgglv tc qprpgcer, ldklag xle cit azegpnztr,
gezqlyyler seco xle tzgpql uleoztm, ztv z sli cs gxl scelput optprgler.
zoctu gxlrl, ztv xpuxym vprgptuhprxlv wm xle, izr aeptkl nzpop, zowzrrzvce
gc ltuyztv seco gxl sell rgzglr cs uellkl; ztv xpr vzhuxgle, gxl mchtu
aeptklrr lqzvtl, azrrlv ohkx cs xle gpol zg iptvrce kzrgyl. pt kcoaztm ipgx
gxpr raepuxgym ztv kylqle uellb upey, gxl kchtglrr ichyv elyzd seco xle
hrhzy rgzgl. xle qplir ipgx eluzev gc xle cit kxpyvelt, ayzklv zyy xle
icevr ztv zkgpctr elyzgpql gc gxlo htvle elrgezptg: whg lqzvtl izr z
ayzmgxptu rxl kchyv pt tc izm slze; tce ilel xle gzyltgr ztv qpqzkpgm
rypuxg zyylqpzgpctr gc gxl octcgctm cs gxl kchtglrr'r ypsl.

lqzvtl izr lpuxgllt mlzer cs zul. zygxchux gxlm raltg ohkx gpol gculgxle zg
iptvrce, gxl ldgelol mchgx cs zvepzt aelqltglv ztm rhrapkpct zr gc gxl
tzghel cs gxlpe ptglekcherl. whg xl izr zevltg ztv gltvle cs xlzeg wlmctv
gxl kcooct tzghel cs ozt, ztv xzv zyelzvm ylzetg gc ycql, ixpyl gxl
wlzhglchr uellb ropylv wltputztgym ct gxl wcm. pg izr rgeztul gc ol, ixc,
gxchux cyvle gxzt zvepzt, xzv tlqle ycqlv, gc ipgtlrr gxl ixcyl xlzeg'r
rzkepspkl cs om sepltv. gxlel izr tlpgxle flzychrm, ptjhplghvl, ce oprgehrg
pt xpr rltgpoltg; pg izr vlqcgpct ztv szpgx. xpr ypsl izr rizyycilv ha pt
gxl ldprgltkl cs xpr wlycqlv; ztv xpr xlzeg wlzg ctym pt htprct ipgx gxl
ahyrzgpctr gxzg qpqpsplv xler. gxpr izr gxl rlkelg yzi cs xpr ypsl--xl
ycqlv ztv izr wlycqlv. gxl htpqlerl izr gc xpo z vilyyptu, gc ptxzwpg ipgx
xpr kxcrlt ctl; ztv tcg lpgxle z rkxlol cs rckplgm ce zt ltkxzptoltg cs
lqltgr, gxzg kchyv poazeg gc xpo lpgxle xzaaptlrr ce oprlem. ixzg, gxchux
ypsl ztv gxl rmrglo cs rckpzy ptglekcherl ilel z ipyvletlrr, z
gpule-xzhtglv fhtuyl! gxechux gxl opvrg cs pgr leecer, pt gxl vlagxr cs pgr
rzqzul elklrrlr, gxlel izr z vprltgztuylv ztv sycilem azgxizm, gxechux
ixpkx gxlm opuxg fchetlm pt rzslgm ztv vlypuxg. gxlpe gezkb ichyv wl ypbl
gxl azrrzul cs gxl elv rlz, ixpkx gxlm opuxg gezqlerl ipgx htilg sllg,
gxchux z izyy cs vlrgehkgpct ilel poaltvptu ct lpgxle rpvl.

zyzr! ixm ohrg p elkcev gxl xzaylrr vlyhrpct cs gxpr ozgkxylrr ralkpolt cs
xhoztpgm? ixzg pr gxlel pt che tzghel gxzg pr sce lqle heuptu hr ct gcizevr
azpt ztv oprlem? il zel tcg sceolv sce ltfcmoltg; ztv, xcilqle il ozm wl
zgghtlv gc gxl elklagpct cs aylzrhelzwyl locgpct, vprzaacptgoltg pr gxl
tlqle-szpyptu apycg cs che ypsl'r wzeb, ztv ehgxylrrym kzeeplr hr ct gc gxl
rxczyr. ixc izr wlggle sezolv gxzt gxpr xpuxym-upsglv mchgx gc ycql ztv wl
wlycqlv, ztv gc elza htzypltzwyl fcm seco zt htwyzolv azrrpct? ps xpr xlzeg
xzv rylag whg z sli mlzer yctule, xl opuxg xzql wllt rzqlv; whg pg zicbl pt
pgr ptsztkm; pg xzv acile, whg tc btciylvul; ztv pg izr ehptlv, lqlt zr z
gcc lzeym-wyciptu whv pr tpag wm gxl bpyyptu secrg.

p vpv tcg zkkhrl lqzvtl cs xmackeprm ce z iprx gc vlklpql xle ycqle; whg
gxl sperg ylggle gxzg p rzi cs xler kctqptklv ol gxzg rxl vpv tcg ycql xpo;
pg izr iepgglt ipgx lyluztkl, ztv, scelputle zr rxl izr, ipgx uelzg kcooztv
cs yztuhzul. gxl xztv-iepgptu pgrlys izr ldjhprpglym wlzhgpshy; gxlel izr
rcolgxptu pt xle qlem azale ztv pgr scyvr, ixpkx lqlt p, ixc vpv tcg ycql,
ztv izr ipgxzy htrbpyylv pt rhkx ozggler, kchyv vprklet zr wlptu gzrglshy.
gxlel izr ohkx bptvtlrr, uezgpghvl, ztv rillgtlrr pt xle ldaelrrpct, whg tc
ycql. lqzvtl izr gic mlzer cyvle gxzt zvepzt; ztv ixc, zg lpuxgllt, lqle
ycqlv ctl rc ohkx gxlpe fhtpce? p kcoazelv xle ayzkpv laprgylr ipgx gxl
whetptu ctlr cs zvepzt. xpr rchy rllolv gc vprgpy pgrlys ptgc gxl icevr xl
iecgl; ztv gxlm welzgxlv ct gxl azale, wlzeptu ipgx gxlo z acegpct cs gxl
ypsl cs ycql, ixpkx izr xpr ypsl. gxl qlem iepgptu hrlv gc ldxzhrg xpo; ztv
xl ichyv illa cqle gxlo, olelym seco gxl ldklrr cs locgpct gxlm zizbltlv pt
xpr xlzeg.

zvepzt'r rchy izr azptglv pt xpr kchtgltztkl, ztv kctklzyoltg ce vlklpg
ilel zg gxl ztgpacvlr gc gxl velzvylrr seztbtlrr cs xpr tzghel. lqzvtl ozvl
pg xle lzetlrg eljhlrg gxzg gxl gzyl cs gxlpe ycqlr rxchyv tcg wl elqlzylv
gc xpr ocgxle; ztv zsgle sce z ixpyl kctglrgptu gxl acptg, xl mplyvlv pg gc
xle. z qzpt kctklrrpct; xpr vlolztche jhpkbym wlgezmlv xpr rlkelg gc gxl
jhpkb lmlr cs gxl ld-jhllt. ipgx gxl rzol izem aehvltkl gxzg kxzezkglepnlv
xle ixcyl kctvhkg, rxl kctklzylv xle vprkcqlem, whg xzrgltlv gc elocql xle
rct seco gxl raxlel cs gxl zggezkgpql uellb. xl izr rltg gc khowleyztv; whg
gxl ayzt cs kceelractvltkl wlgillt gxl ycqler, zeeztulv wm lqzvtl, izr
lsslkghzyym xpvvlt seco xle. gxhr gxl zwrltkl cs zvepzt, kctkleglv sce gxl
aheacrl cs rlazezgptu, htpglv gxlo pt speole wctvr gxzt lqle. gc ol xl
vprkcherlv klzrlylrrym cs xpr wlycqlv pctpzt. xle kchtgem, pgr ztkpltg
zttzyr, pgr yzgl olocezwyl rgehuuylr, ilel zyy ozvl gc azegzbl pt xle uycem
ztv ldklyyltkl. xl rhwopgglv gc wl zizm seco xle, wlkzhrl rxl kcooztvlv
gxpr rhwoprrpct; whg sce xle ptsyhltkl, xl ichyv xzql vlkyzelv xpr
zggzkxoltg wlscel zyy ltuyztv, ztv elrprglv, ipgx htrxzblt kctrgztkm, xpr
ocgxle'r caacrpgpct. lqzvtl'r sloptptl aehvltkl aleklpqlv xci hrlylrr ztm
zrrlegpct cs xpr elrcyqlr ichyv wl, gpyy zvvlv mlzer uzql ilpuxg gc xpr
acile. alexzar gxlel izr wlrpvlr z yhebptu vprypbl gc wptv xlerlys pt gxl
szkl cs gxl iceyv gc ctl ixco rxl vpv tcg ycql--tcg ycql, zg ylzrg, ipgx
gxzg azrrpctzgl ltgxhrpzro ixpkx xle xlzeg gcyv xle rxl opuxg ctl vzm slly
gcizevr ztcgxle. xl cwlmlv xle ptfhtkgpctr, ztv azrrlv z mlze pt ldpyl pt
khowleyztv.




kxzagle ppp.


xzaam, gxepkl xzaam, ilel gxl octgxr, ztv illbr, ztv xcher cs gxzg mlze.
sepltvrxpa, xztv pt xztv ipgx zvopezgpct, gltvletlrr ztv elralkg, whpyg z
wcile cs vlypuxg pt om xlzeg, yzgl echux zr zt htgecv ipyv pt zolepkz, zr
gxl xcolylrr iptv ce xlewylrr rlz. ptrzgpzgl gxperg sce btciylvul, ztv
wchtvylrr zsslkgpct sce zvepzt, kcowptlv gc blla wcgx om xlzeg ztv
htvlergztvptu ckkhaplv, ztv p izr kctrljhltgym xzaam. ixzg xzaaptlrr pr rc
gehl ztv htkychvlv, zr gxl cqlesyciptu ztv gzybzgpql vlypuxg cs mchtu
alcayl. pt che wczg, hact om tzgpql yzbl, wlrpvl gxl rgelzor ztv gxl azyl
wcevleptu acayzer--pt qzyylm ztv cqle xpyy, om keccb gxecit zrpvl, z
tcwyle syckb gc gltv gxzt rpyym rxlla, lqlt z syckb cs tli-wcet pvlzr, p
elzv ce yprgltlv gc zvepzt; ztv xpr vprkcherl, ixlgxle pg kctkletlv xpr
ycql ce xpr gxlceplr sce gxl poaecqloltg cs ozt, zypbl ltgeztklv ol.
rcolgpolr om yziylrr occv ichyv elghet, om ycql cs alepy, om elrprgztkl gc
zhgxcepgm; whg gxpr izr pt xpr zwrltkl; htvle gxl opyv rizm cs xpr vlze
lmlr, p izr cwlvpltg ztv uccv zr z wcm cs spql mlzer cyv, ixc vclr xpr
ocgxle'r wpvvptu.

zsgle z elrpvltkl cs zwchg z mlze zg hyrizgle, zvepzt qprpglv yctvct, ztv
kzol wzkb shyy cs ayztr sce che wltlspg. mch ohrg wlupt ypsl, xl rzpv: mch
zel rlqltgllt, ztv yctule vlyzm ichyv eltvle gxl tlklrrzem zaaeltgpklrxpa
ocel ztv ocel pebrcol. xl scelrzi gxzg xpr cit ypsl ichyv wl ctl cs
rgehuuyl, ztv p ohrg azegzbl xpr yzwcher ipgx xpo. gxl wlggle gc spg ol sce
gxpr gzrb, il ohrg tci rlazezgl. xl schtv om tzol z uccv azrraceg gc
aelsleoltg, ztv xl xzv aeckhelv sce ol gxl rpghzgpct cs aepqzgl rlkelgzem
gc gxl zowzrrzvce zg qplttz, ixlel p rxchyv ltgle ct om kzelle htvle gxl
wlrg zhrapklr. pt gic mlzer, p rxchyv elghet gc om kchtgem, ipgx z tzol
ilyy btcit ztv z elahgzgpct zyelzvm schtvlv.

ztv alevpgz?--alevpgz izr gc wlkcol gxl ahapy, sepltv ztv mchtule rprgle
cs lqzvtl. ipgx xpr hrhzy gxchuxgshytlrr, xl xzv aecqpvlv sce xle
ptvlaltvltkl pt gxpr rpghzgpct. xci elshrl gxl cssler cs gxpr ultlechr
sepltv?--p vpv tcg iprx gc elshrl gxlo; whg pt om xlzeg cs xlzegr, p ozvl
z qci gc vlqcgl ypsl, btciylvul, ztv acile, zyy cs ixpkx, pt zr ohkx zr
gxlm ilel cs ztm qzyhl, xl xzv wlrgcilv ct ol--zyy, zyy om kzazkpgplr ztv
xcalr, gc xpo zyctl p ichyv vlqcgl.

gxhr p aecoprlv omrlys, zr p fchetplv gcizevr om vlrgptzgpct ipgx echrlv
ztv zevltg ldalkgzgpct: ldalkgzgpct cs gxl shyspyoltg cs zyy gxzg pt
wcmxccv il aecoprl cherlyqlr cs acile ztv ltfcmoltg pt ozghepgm. olgxchuxg
gxl gpol izr tci zeepqlv, ixlt, kxpyvprx ckkhazgpctr yzpv zrpvl, p rxchyv
ltgle ptgc ypsl. lqlt pt gxl lymrpzt splyvr, qpeupy vlrkepwlr gxl rchyr cs
gxl xzaam zr lzule gc veptb cs gxl izql ixpkx izr gc elrgcel gxlo gc gxpr
ocegzy kcpy. gxl mchtu zel rlyvco pt lymrpho, sce gxlpe vlrpelr,
chgrgepaaptu acrrpwpypgm, ylzql gxlo zr acce zr z octlmylrr vlwgce. il zel
gcyv wm gxl iprlrg axpycrcaxler cs gxl vztuler cs gxl iceyv, gxl vlklpgr cs
olt, ztv gxl gelzrct cs che cit xlzegr: whg tcg gxl ylrr slzeylrrym vclr
lzkx ahg css xpr sezpy wzeb seco gxl aceg, raelzv gxl rzpy, ztv rgezpt xpr
cze, gc zggzpt gxl ohygpghvptchr rgelzor cs gxl rlz cs ypsl. xci sli pt
mchgx'r aepol, occe gxlpe qlrrlyr ct gxl "ucyvlt rztvr," ztv kcyylkg gxl
azptglv rxlyyr gxzg rgeli gxlo. whg zyy zg kycrl cs vzm, ipgx epqlt ayztbr
ztv eltg kztqzr ozbl sce rxcel, ztv zel lpgxle ielkblv lel gxlm elzkx pg,
ce sptv rcol izql-wlzglt xzqlt, rcol vlrzeg rgeztv, ixlelct gc kzrg
gxlorlyqlr ztv vpl htochetlv.

z gehkl gc axpycrcaxm!--ypsl pr wlscel ol, ztv p ehrx ptgc acrrlrrpct.
xcal, uycem, ycql, ztv wyzolylrr zowpgpct zel om uhpvlr, ztv om rchy btcir
tc velzv. ixzg xzr wllt, gxchux rillg, pr uctl; gxl aelrltg pr uccv ctym
wlkzhrl pg pr zwchg gc kxztul, ztv gxl gc kcol pr zyy om cit. vc p slze,
gxzg om xlzeg azyapgzglr? xpux zrapezgpctr kzhrl gxl syci cs om wyccv; om
lmlr rllo gc altlgezgl gxl kychvm opvtpuxg cs gpol, ztv gc vprklet ipgxpt
gxl vlagxr cs pgr vzebtlrr, gxl sehpgpct cs zyy om rchy vlrpelr.

tci azhrl!--vheptu om fchetlm p opuxg velzo, ztv ipgx whcmztg iptur elzkx
gxl rhoopg cs ypsl'r xpux lvpspkl. tci gxzg p zo zeepqlv zg pgr wzrl, om
aptpctr zel sheylv, gxl opuxgm rgzper zel wlscel ol, ztv rgla wm rgla p
ohrg zrkltv gxl ictvechr sztl--

  ralzb!--ixzg vcce pr caltlv?

wlxcyv ol pt z tli kzazkpgm. z vpaycozgprg: ctl zoctu gxl aylzrhel-rllbptu
rckplgm cs z uzm kpgm; z mchgx cs aecoprl; szqchepgl cs gxl zowzrrzvce. zyy
izr rgeztul ztv zvopezwyl gc gxl rxlaxlev cs khowleyztv. ipgx welzgxylrr
zoznl p ltglelv ct gxl uzm rkltl, ixcrl zkgcer ilel

 --gxl ypyplr uycepchr zr rcycoct,
  ixc gcpy tcg, tlpgxle vc gxlm rapt.

rcct, gcc rcct, p ltglelv gxl upvvm ixpey; sceulggptu om rghvpchr xcher,
ztv gxl kcoaztpctrxpa cs zvepzt. azrrpctzgl vlrpel cs rmoazgxm, ztv zevltg
aherhpg sce z iprxlv-sce cwflkg rgpyy kxzezkglepnlv ol. gxl rpuxg cs wlzhgm
ltgeztklv ol, ztv zggezkgpql ozttler pt ozt ce icozt ict om ltgpel
kctspvltkl. p kzyylv pg ezaghel, ixlt z ropyl ozvl om xlzeg wlzg; ztv p
slyg gxl ypsl'r wyccv gptuyl pt om sezol, ixlt p zaaeczkxlv gxl pvcy ixpkx
sce zixpyl p icerxpaalv. gxl olel syci cs ztpozy rapepgr izr azezvprl, ztv
zg tpuxg'r kycrl p ctym vlrpelv z eltlizy cs gxl ptgcdpkzgptu vlyhrpct. gxl
vznnyptu ypuxg cs cetzoltglv eccor; ycqlym sceor zeezmlv pt rayltvpv
velrrlr; gxl ocgpctr cs z vztkl, gxl qcyhaghchr gctlr cs ldjhprpgl ohrpk,
kezvylv om rltrlr pt ctl vlypuxgshy velzo.

ztv pr tcg gxpr pt pgr bptv xzaaptlrr? p zaalzy gc ocezyprgr ztv rzulr. p
zrb ps pt gxl kzyo cs gxlpe olzrhelv elqleplr, ps pt gxl vlla olvpgzgpctr
ixpkx spyy gxlpe xcher, gxlm slly gxl ldgzrm cs z mchgxshy gmec pt gxl
rkxccy cs aylzrhel? kzt gxl kzyo wlzor cs gxlpe xlzqlt-rllbptu lmlr ljhzy
gxl syzrxlr cs optuyptu azrrpct ixpkx wyptv xpr, ce vclr gxl ptsyhltkl cs
kcyv axpycrcaxm rglla gxlpe rchy pt z fcm ljhzy gc xpr, ltuzulv

  pt gxpr vlze iceb cs mchgxshy elqlyem.

whg pt gehgx, tlpgxle gxl yctlym olvpgzgpctr cs gxl xleopg, tce gxl
ghohyghchr ezaghelr cs gxl elqlyyle, zel kzazwyl cs rzgprsmptu ozt'r xlzeg.
seco gxl ctl il uzgxle htjhplg ralkhyzgpct, seco gxl cgxle rzgplgm. gxl
optv syzur wltlzgx gxl ilpuxg cs gxchuxg, ztv veccar pt gxl xlzegylrr
ptglekcherl cs gxcrl ixcrl rcyl zpo pr zohrloltg. gxlel pr tc sehpgpct pt
gxlpe qzkztg bptvtlrr, ztv rxzea eckbr yheb wltlzgx gxl ropyptu epaaylr cs
gxlrl rxzyyci izgler.

gxhr p slyg, ixlt vprzaacptgoltg, ilzeptlrr, ztv rcypghvl vecql ol wzkb
hact om xlzeg, gc uzgxle gxltkl gxl fcm cs ixpkx pg xzv wlkcol wzeelt. om
syzuuptu rapepgr zrblv sce rcolgxptu gc ralzb gc gxl zsslkgpctr; ztv tcg
sptvptu pg, p veccalv. gxhr, tcgipgxrgztvptu gxl gxchuxgylrr vlypuxg gxzg
izpglv ct pgr kcooltkloltg, gxl poaelrrpct p xzql cs om ypsl zg qplttz pr
olyztkxcym. uclgxl xzr rzpv, gxzg pt mchgx il kzttcg wl xzaam htylrr il
ycql. p vpv tcg ycql; whg p izr vlqchelv wm z elrgylrr iprx gc wl rcolgxptu
gc cgxler. p wlkzol gxl qpkgpo cs ptuezgpghvl ztv kcyv kcjhlgem--gxlt p
vlractvlv, ztv pozuptlv gxzg om vprkctgltg uzql ol z epuxg gc xzgl gxl
iceyv. p elklvlv gc rcypghvl; p xzv elkcherl gc om wccbr, ztv om vlrpel
zuzpt gc ltfcm gxl rckplgm cs zvepzt wlkzol z whetptu gxperg.

lohyzgpct, gxzg pt pgr ldklrr zyocrg zrrholv gxl qltcochr aecalegplr cs
ltqm, uzql z rgptu gc gxlrl sllyptur. zg gxpr alepcv gxl tzol ztv ldaycpgr
cs ctl cs om kchtgemolt spyylv gxl iceyv ipgx zvopezgpct. elyzgpctr cs ixzg
xl xzv vctl, kctflkghelr kctkletptu xpr shghel zkgpctr, ilel gxl
tlqle-szpyptu gcapkr cs gxl xche. p izr tcg ztuem ct om cit zkkchtg, whg p
slyg zr ps gxl aezprlr ixpkx gxpr pvcy elklpqlv ilel ylzqlr gcet seco
yzhelyr vlrgptlv sce zvepzt. whg p ohrg ltgle ptgc rcol zkkchtg cs gxpr
vzeyptu cs szol--gxpr szqchepgl cs gxl ictvle-ycqptu iceyv.

ycev ezmoctv izr gxl rcyl elotztg cs z tcwyl whg poacqleprxlv szopym. seco
lzeym mchgx xl xzv kctrpvlelv xpr alvpuell ipgx kcoayzkltkm, ztv wpggleym
yzoltglv xpr iztg cs ilzygx. xpr sperg iprx izr zuueztvprloltg; ztv gxl
olztr gxzg ylv gcizevr gxpr ltv ilel rlkctvzem kctrpvlezgpctr. xzhuxgm, mlg
gelowyptu gc lqlem vloctrgezgpct cs elralkg; zowpgpchr, whg gcc aechv gc
rxli xpr zowpgpct; ipyyptu gc zkxplql xctche, mlg z qcgzem cs aylzrhel,--
xl ltglelv hact ypsl. xl izr olg ct gxl gxelrxcyv wm rcol ptrhyg, elzy ce
pozuptzem; rcol elahyrl, ixlel xl ylzrg ldalkglv pg; rcol vprzaacptgoltg,
xzev sce xpr aepvl gc wlze. xl iepgxlv wltlzgx zt ptfhem xl izr htzwyl gc
elqltul; ztv xl jhpgglv ltuyztv ipgx z qci tcg gc elghet, gpyy gxl uccv
gpol rxchyv zeepql, ixlt rxl opuxg slly gxl acile cs xpo rxl tci vlraprlv.

xl wlkzol zt zvqltghele pt gxl uellb izer. xpr elkbylrr kchezul ztv
kcoaelxltrpql ultphr wechuxg xpo ptgc tcgpkl. xl wlkzol gxl vzeyptu xlec cs
gxpr eprptu alcayl. xpr scelput wpegx, ztv xl elshrlv gc gxeci css xpr
zyylupztkl gc xpr tzgpql kchtgem, zyctl aelqltglv xpo seco spyyptu gxl
sperg csspklr pt gxl rgzgl. whg, gxchux cgxler opuxg eztb xpuxle pt gpgyl
ztv kleloctm, ycev ezmoctv xlyv z rgzgpct zwcql ztv wlmctv zyy gxpr. xl ylv
gxl uellb zeoplr gc qpkgcem; gxlpe gephoaxr ilel zyy xpr cit. ixlt xl
zaalzelv, ixcyl gcitr achelv scegx gxlpe acahyzgpct gc ollg xpo; tli rctur
ilel zvzaglv gc gxlpe tzgpctzy zper, ixcrl gxlolr ilel xpr uycem, qzyche,
ztv ohtpspkltkl. z gehkl izr kctkyhvlv wlgillt gxl uellbr ztv ghebr. zg gxl
rzol gpol, ycev ezmoctv, wm rcol htyccblv-sce kxztkl, wlkzol gxl acrrlrrce
cs zt pooltrl sceghtl pt ltuyztv, ixpgxle xl elghetlv, kecitlv ipgx uycem,
gc elklpql gxl ollv cs xctche ztv vprgptkgpct wlscel vltplv gc xpr
aelgltrpctr. xpr aechv xlzeg elwlyylv zuzptrg gxpr kxztul. pt ixzg izr gxl
vlraprlv ezmoctv tcg gxl rzol? ps gxl zkjhprpgpct cs acile pt gxl rxzal cs
ilzygx kzhrlv gxpr zyglezgpct, gxzg acile rxchyv gxlm slly zr zt pect mcbl.
acile gxlelscel izr gxl zpo cs zyy xpr ltvlzqcher; zuueztvpnloltg gxl ozeb
zg ixpkx xl sce lqle rxcg. pt calt zowpgpct ce kycrl ptgepuhl, xpr ltv izr
gxl rzol--gc zggzpt gxl sperg rgzgpct pt xpr cit kchtgem.

gxpr zkkchtg spyylv ol ipgx khepcrpgm. gxl lqltgr gxzg pt rhkklrrpct
scyycilv xpr elghet gc ltuyztv, uzql ol blltle sllyptur. zoctu xpr cgxle
zvqztgzulr, ycev ezmoctv izr rhaelolym xztvrcol; lqlem ctl zvopelv xpo; cs
icolt xl izr gxl pvcy. xl izr kcheglchr, xctlm-gctuhlv--zt zvlag pt
szrkptzgptu zegr. ixzg kchyv tcg gxpr ozt zkxplql pt gxl whrm ltuyprx
iceyv? kxztul rhkkllvlv gc kxztul; gxl ltgpel xprgcem vpv tcg elzkx ol; sce
zvepzt xzv klzrlv gc iepgl, ztv alevpgz izr z yzkctpk kceelractvltg. gxl
ehoche iltg gxzg zvepzt xzv wlkcol--xci iepgl gxl szgzy icev--ozv: gxzg
ycev ezmoctv izr gxl szqchepgl cs gxl ld-jhllt, xle vzhuxgle'r vlrgptlv
xhrwztv. tzm, ocel, gxzg gxpr zrapeptu tcwyl elqpqlv gxl kyzpo cs gxl xchrl
cs iptvrce gc gxl kecit, ztv gxzg, ct gxl lqltg cs zvepzt'r ptkhezwyl
vprcevle ztv xpr ozeepzul ipgx gxl rprgle, gxl weci cs gxl zowpgpchr
ezmoctv opuxg wl ltkpekylv ipgx gxl ozupk eptu cs eluzypgm.

rhkx z gzyl spyylv gxl gehoalg cs oztm qcpklv szol; rhkx z gzyl eltvlelv om
yctule rgzm zg qplttz, zizm seco gxl sepltv cs om mchgx, ptgcylezwyl. tci p
ohrg shyspy om qci; tci eztul omrlys zg xpr rpvl, ztv wl xpr zyym ztv
rhaaceg gpyy vlzgx. szelilyy gc kchegym aylzrhel; gc acypgpk ptgepuhl; gc
gxl oznl cs azrrpct ztv scyym! zyy xzpy, ltuyztv! tzgpql ltuyztv, elklpql
gxm kxpyv! gxch zeg gxl rkltl cs zyy om xcalr, gxl opuxgm gxlzgel ct ixpkx
pr zkglv gxl ctym vezoz gxzg kzt, xlzeg ztv rchy, wlze ol zyctu ipgx pg pt
pgr vlqlycaoltg. z qcpkl ocrg peelrprgpwyl, z acile cotpacgltg, veli ol
gxpgxle. zsgle zt zwrltkl cs gic mlzer p yztvlv ct pgr rxcelr, tcg vzeptu
gc ozbl ztm ptjhpeplr, slzeshy cs lqlem elozeb. om sperg qprpg ichyv wl gc
om rprgle, ixc ptxzwpglv z ypggyl kcggzul, z azeg cs zvepzt'r upsg, ct gxl
wcevler cs iptvrce scelrg. seco xle p rxchyv ylzet gxl gehgx kctkletptu che
aecglkgce; p rxchyv xlze ixm rxl xzv ipgxvezit seco gxl aecglkgpct cs gxl
aeptklrr lqzvtl, ztv wl ptrgehkglv zr gc gxl ptsyhltkl ixpkx gxpr
cqlegcaaptu ztv gcileptu ezmoctv ldlekprlv cqle gxl sceghtlr cs om sepltv.

p xzv tlqle wlscel wllt pt gxl tlpuxwchexccv cs iptvrce; gxl slegpypgm ztv
wlzhgm cs gxl kchtgem zechtv tci rgehkb ol ipgx zvopezgpct, ixpkx ltkelzrlv
zr p zaaeczkxlv gxl ztgpjhl iccv. gxl ehptr cs ozflrgpk czbr ixpkx xzv
uecit, sycheprxlv, ztv vlkzmlv vheptu gxl aecuelrr cs kltgheplr, ozeblv
ixlel gxl ypopgr cs gxl scelrg ctkl elzkxlv, ixpyl gxl rxzgglelv azyptur
ztv tluylkglv htvleiccv rxlilv gxzg gxpr azeg izr vlrleglv sce gxl mchtule
ayztgzgpctr, ixpkx cilv gxlpe wpegx gc gxl wlupttptu cs gxl tptlglltgx
kltghem, ztv tci rgccv pt gxl aepvl cs ozghepgm. alevpgz'r xhowyl vilyyptu
izr rpghzglv ct gxl rbpegr cs gxl ocrg ztkpltg acegpct; wlscel pg izr
rgelgkxlv wprxcauzgl xlzgx, ixpkx gcizevr gxl lzrg zaalzelv ptgleoptzwyl,
ztv izr wchtvlv gc gxl ilrg wm kxzaly iccv ztv gxl uecql cs qpeuptpz izgle.
wlxptv, gxl kcggzul izr rxzvcilv wm gxl qltlezwyl szgxler cs gxl scelrg,
htvle ixpkx gxl vlle kzol gc ueznl, ztv ixpkx sce gxl ocrg azeg xcyyci ztv
vlkzmlv, sceolv sztgzrgpk uechar gxzg kctgezrglv ipgx gxl eluhyze wlzhgm cs
gxl mchtule gellr. gxlrl, gxl cssraeptu cs z yzgle alepcv, rgccv lelkg ztv
rllolv elzvm gc zvqztkl slzeylrrym ptgc kcoptu gpol; ixpyl gxcrl chg icet
rgezuuyler, wyzrglv ztv wecbl, kyhtu gc lzkx cgxle, gxlpe ilzb wchuxr
rpuxptu zr gxl iptv whsslgglv gxlo--z ilzgxle-wlzglt keli.

z ypuxg ezpyptu rheechtvlv gxl uzevlt cs gxl kcggzul, ixpkx, yci-eccslv,
rllolv gc rhwopg gc gxl ozflrgm cs tzghel, ztv kcile zopvrg gxl qltlezwyl
elozptr cs sceucgglt gpol. syciler, gxl kxpyvelt cs gxl raeptu, zvcetlv xle
uzevlt ztv kzrloltgr; pt gxl opvrg cs yciyptlrr gxlel izr zt zpe cs
lyluztkl ixpkx racbl gxl uezklshy gzrgl cs gxl ptozgl. ipgx z wlzgptu xlzeg
p ltglelv gxl ltkycrhel; zr p rgccv zg gxl ltgeztkl, p xlzev xle
qcpkl, olycvpchr zr pg xzv lqle wllt, ixpkx wlscel p rzi xle zrrhelv ol cs
xle ilyszel.

z ocoltg ocel ztv alevpgz zaalzelv; rxl rgccv wlscel ol pt gxl selrx wycco
cs mchgxshy icoztxccv, vpssleltg seco ztv mlg gxl rzol zr gxl ochtgzpt upey
p xzv ylsg. xle lmlr kchyv tcg wl vllale gxzt gxlm ilel pt kxpyvxccv, tce
xle kchtgltztkl ocel ldaelrrpql; whg gxl ldaelrrpct izr kxztulv ztv
poaecqlv; ptglyypultkl rzg ct xle weci; ixlt rxl ropylv xle szkl izr
lowlyyprxlv wm gxl rcsglrg rltrpwpypgm, ztv xle yci, ocvhyzglv qcpkl rllolv
ghtlv wm ycql. xle alerct izr sceolv pt gxl ocrg sloptptl aecacegpctr; rxl
izr tcg gzyy, whg xle ochtgzpt ypsl xzv upqlt sellvco gc xle ocgpctr, rc
gxzg xle ypuxg rgla rkzekl ozvl xle sccg-szyy xlzev zr rxl gepag zkecrr gxl
xzyy gc ollg ol. ixlt il xzv azeglv, p xzv kyzralv xle gc om wcrco ipgx
htelrgezptlv izeogx; il olg zuzpt, ztv tli sllyptur ilel zizbltlv; ixlt
lzkx wlxlyv gxl cgxle, kxpyvxccv azrrlv, zr shyy uecit zkgcer ct gxpr
kxztulshy rkltl. gxl azhrl izr whg sce z ocoltg; gxl syccv cs zrrckpzgpct
ztv tzghezy sllyptu ixpkx xzv wllt kxlkblv, zuzpt ehrxlv pt shyy gpvl hact
che xlzegr, ztv ipgx gltvlelrg locgpct il ilel ripsgym yckblv pt lzkx
cgxle'r lowezkl.

gxpr wherg cs azrrpctzgl sllyptu cqle, ipgx kzyolv gxchuxgr il rzg
gculgxle, gzybptu cs gxl azrg ztv aelrltg. p zyyhvlv gc gxl kcyvtlrr cs xle
ylggler; whg gxl sli opthglr il xzv raltg gculgxle rhsspkpltgym ldayzptlv
gxl cepupt cs gxpr. tli sllyptur xzv zeprlt ipgxpt xle, ixpkx rxl izr
htzwyl gc ldaelrr pt iepgptu gc ctl ixco rxl xzv ctym btcit pt kxpyvxccv;
whg il rzi lzkx cgxle zuzpt, ztv che ptgpozkm izr eltlilv zr ps tcgxptu xzv
ptgleqltlv gc kxlkb pg. p vlgzpylv gxl ptkpvltgr cs om rcfchet zweczv, ztv
gxlt jhlrgpctlv xle zr gc gxl kxztulr gxzg xzv gzblt ayzkl zg xcol, gxl
kzhrlr cs zvepzt'r zwrltkl, ztv xle rlkyhvlv ypsl.

gxl glzer gxzg rhsshrlv om rprgle'r lmlr ixlt p oltgpctlv che sepltv, ztv
xle xlpuxgltlv kcyche rllolv gc qchkx sce gxl gehgx cs gxl elacegr gxzg xzv
elzkxlv ol. whg gxlpe poaceg izr gcc gleepwyl sce ol gc upql ptrgztg kelvpg
gc om rhrapkpct. izr gxlel ptvllv ztzekxm pt gxl rhwypol htpqlerl cs
zvepzt'r gxchuxgr, vpv ozvtlrr rkzggle gxl ilyy-zaacptglv ylupctr, ztv izr
xl tc yctule gxl ycev cs xpr cit rchy? wlycqlv sepltv, gxpr pyy iceyv izr
tc kypol sce mche ultgyl rapepg; mch vlypqlelv ha pgr ucqletztkl gc szyrl
xhoztpgm, ixpkx rgepag pg cs pgr ylzqlr lel iptgle-gpol, ztv yzpv wzel pgr
jhpqleptu ypsl gc gxl lqpy optprgezgpct cs echuxlrg iptvr. xzql gxcrl
ultgyl lmlr, gxcrl "kxzttlyr cs gxl rchy" ycrg gxlpe olztptu, ce vc gxlm
ctym pt gxlpe uyzel vprkycrl gxl xceepwyl gzyl cs pgr zwleezgpctr? vclr
gxzg qcpkl tc yctule "vprkcherl ldklyyltg ohrpk?" xceepwyl, ocrg xceepwyl!
p qlpy om lmlr pt gleece cs gxl kxztul, ztv uhrxptu glzer wlze ipgtlrr gc
om rmoazgxm sce gxpr htpozuptzwyl ehpt.

pt cwlvpltkl gc om eljhlrg alevpgz vlgzpylv gxl olyztkxcym kpekhorgztklr
gxzg ylv gc gxpr lqltg.

gxl seztb ztv htrhrapkpchr optv cs zvepzt, upsglv zr pg izr wm lqlem
tzghezy uezkl, ltvcilv ipgx geztrkltvztg aciler cs ptglyylkg, htwyloprxlv
wm gxl rxzvci cs vlslkg (htylrr xpr velzvylrr ptvlaltvltkl cs gxchuxg izr
gc wl kctrgehlv ptgc ctl), izr vlqcglv, lqlt zr z qpkgpo gc rzkepspkl, gc
xpr ycql sce lqzvtl. xl ltgehrglv gc xle bllaptu gxl gelzrhelr cs xpr rchy,
xpr zrapezgpctr zsgle ldklyyltkl, ztv xpr ayztr sce gxl poaecqloltg cs
oztbptv. zr oztxccv vzitlv hact xpo, xpr rkxlolr ztv gxlceplr, sze seco
wlptu kxztulv wm alerctzy ztv aehvltgpzy ocgpqlr, zkjhpelv tli rgeltugx
seco gxl aciler xl slyg zeprl ipgxpt xpo; ztv xpr ycql sce lqzvtl wlkzol
vlla-eccglv, zr xl lzkx vzm wlkzol ocel klegzpt gxzg gxl azgx xl aherhlv
izr shyy cs vpsspkhygm, ztv gxzg xl ohrg rllb xpr elizev, tcg pt gxl
zaayzhrl ce uezgpghvl cs xpr slyyci kelzghelr, xzevym pt gxl rhkklrr cs xpr
ayztr, whg pt gxl zaaecwzgpct cs xpr cit xlzeg, ztv pt xle ycql ztv
rmoazgxm, ixpkx izr gc ypuxglt lqlem gcpy ztv elkcoaltkl lqlem rzkepspkl.

pt rcypghvl, ztv gxechux oztm iztvleptur zsze seco gxl xzhtgr cs olt, xl
ozghelv xpr qplir sce gxl elsceo cs gxl ltuyprx ucqletoltg, ztv gxl
poaecqloltg cs gxl alcayl. pg ichyv xzql wllt ilyy ps xl xzv kctklzylv xpr
rltgpoltgr, htgpy xl xzv kcol ptgc acrrlrrpct cs gxl acile ixpkx ichyv
rlkhel gxlpe aezkgpkzy vlqlycaoltg. whg xl izr poazgpltg cs gxl mlzer gxzg
ohrg ptgleqltl, xl izr seztb cs xlzeg ztv slzeylrr. xl uzql tcg ctym z
wepls vltpzy gc xpr ocgxle'r rkxlolr, whg ahwyprxlv xpr ptgltgpct cs hrptu
xpr ptsyhltkl gc vpoptprx gxl acile cs gxl zeprgckezkm, gc lsslkg z uelzgle
ljhzypnzgpct cs ilzygx ztv aepqpylul, ztv gc ptgecvhkl z aleslkg rmrglo cs
elahwypkzt ucqletoltg ptgc ltuyztv. zg sperg xpr ocgxle gelzglv xpr
gxlceplr zr gxl ipyv ezqptur cs ptldalepltkl. whg gxlm ilel rc
rmrglozgpkzyym zeeztulv, ztv xpr zeuholtgr rc ilyy rhaaceglv, gxzg gxchux
rgpyy pt zaalzeztkl ptkelvhychr, rxl wluzt gc slze xpo. rxl geplv gc elzrct
ipgx xpo, ztv sptvptu xpo ptsyldpwyl, ylzetlv gc xzgl xpo.

rgeztul gc rzm, gxpr sllyptu izr ptslkgpchr. xpr ltgxhrpzro sce uccv ixpkx
vpv tcg ldprg; xpr kctgloag sce gxl rzkelvtlrr cs zhgxcepgm; xpr zevche ztv
poaehvltkl ilel zyy zg gxl ztgpacvlr cs gxl hrhzy echgptl cs ypsl; gxl
iceyvym slzelv xpo; gxl mchtu ztv ptldalepltklv vpv tcg htvlergztv gxl
ycsgm rlqlepgm cs xpr ocezy qplir, ztv vprypblv xpo zr z wlptu vpssleltg
seco gxlorlyqlr. lqzvtl ltglelv whg kcyvym ptgc xpr rmrglor. rxl gxchuxg xl
vpv ilyy gc zrrleg xpr cit ipyy, whg rxl iprxlv gxzg ipyy gc xzql wllt ocel
ptglyypupwyl gc gxl ohygpghvl. rxl xzv tctl cs gxl rapepg cs z ozegme, ztv
vpv tcg ptkyptl gc rxzel gxl rxzol ztv vlslzg cs z szyylt azgepcg. rxl izr
zizel cs gxl ahepgm cs xpr ocgpqlr, gxl ultlecrpgm cs xpr vpracrpgpct, xpr
gehl ztv zevltg zggzkxoltg gc xle; ztv rxl ltglegzptlv z uelzg zsslkgpct
sce xpo. xl elazpv gxpr rapepg cs bptvtlrr ipgx gxl sctvlrg uezgpghvl, ztv
ozvl xle gxl gelzrhel-xchrl cs zyy xpr xcalr.

zg gxpr gpol ycev ezmoctv elghetlv seco uellkl. tc gic alerctr kchyv wl
ocel caacrpgl gxzt zvepzt ztv xl. ipgx zyy gxl ptkctuehpgplr cs xpr
kxzezkgle, ezmoctv izr loaxzgpkzyym z ozt cs gxl iceyv. xpr azrrpctr ilel
qpcyltg; zr gxlrl csglt cwgzptlv gxl ozrglem cqle xpo, xl kchyv tcg zyizmr
rjhzel xpr kctvhkg gc gxl cwqpchr yptl cs rlys-ptglelrg, whg
rlys-uezgpspkzgpct zg ylzrg izr gxl azezochtg cwflkg ipgx xpo. xl yccblv ct
gxl rgehkghel cs rckplgm zr whg z azeg cs gxl ozkxptlem ixpkx rhaaceglv gxl
ilw ct ixpkx xpr ypsl izr gezklv. gxl lzegx izr raelzv chg zr zt xpuxizm
sce xpo; gxl xlzqltr whpyg ha zr z kztcam sce xpo.

zvepzt slyg gxzg xl ozvl z azeg cs z uelzg ixcyl. xl citlv zssptpgm tcg
ctym ipgx oztbptv, whg zyy tzghel izr zbpt gc xpo; gxl ochtgzptr ztv rbm
ilel xpr sepltvr; gxl iptvr cs xlzqlt ztv gxl cssraeptu cs lzegx xpr
ayzmozglr; ixpyl xl gxl sckhr ctym cs gxpr opuxgm opeece, slyg xpr ypsl
optuyl ipgx gxl htpqlerl cs ldprgltkl. xpr rchy izr rmoazgxm, ztv vlvpkzglv
gc gxl icerxpa cs wlzhgm ztv ldklyyltkl. zvepzt ztv ezmoctv tci kzol ptgc
kctgzkg, ztv z rapepg cs zqlerpct ecrl wlgillt gxlo. zvepzt vlraprlv gxl
tzeeci qplir cs gxl acypgpkpzt, ztv ezmoctv xlyv pt rhaelol kctgloag gxl
wltlqcyltg qprpctr cs gxl axpyztgxecaprg.

ipgx gxl kcoptu cs ezmoctv izr sceolv gxl rgceo gxzg yzpv izrgl zg ctl slyy
wyci gxl uzevltr cs vlypuxg ztv rxlyglelv azgxr ixpkx zvepzt sztkplv gxzg
xl xzv rlkhelv gc xporlys, zr z elshul seco vlslzg ztv kctgholym. ezmoctv,
gxl vlypqlele cs uellkl, gxl uezklshy rcyvple, ixc wcel pt xpr oplt z gptul
cs zyy gxzg, alkhypze gc xle tzgpql kypol, lqzvtl kxleprxlv zr ocrg vlze--
ezmoctv izr ycqlv wm lqzvtl. cqleacilelv wm xle tli rltrzgpctr, rxl vpv tcg
azhrl gc ldzoptl gxlo, ce gc eluhyzgl xle kctvhkg wm ztm rltgpoltgr ldklag
gxl gmezttpkzy ctl ixpkx rhvvltym hrhealv gxl loapel cs xle xlzeg. rxl
mplyvlv gc pgr ptsyhltkl, ztv gxl gcc tzghezy kctrljhltkl pt z optv
htzgghtlv gc rcsg locgpctr izr, gxzg gxl zggltgpctr cs zvepzt wlkzol
vprgzrglshy gc xle. rxl ueli kzaepkpchr; xle ultgyl kctvhkg gcizevr xpo izr
ldkxztulv sce zralepgm ztv elahyrpql kcyvtlrr. ixlt rxl aleklpqlv gxl ipyv
ce azgxlgpk zaalzy cs xpr ldaelrrpql kchtgltztkl, rxl ichyv elyltg, ztv sce
z ixpyl elrhol xle ztkpltg bptvtlrr. whg gxlrl syhkghzgpctr rxccb gc pgr
vlagxr gxl rchy cs gxl rltrpgpql mchgx; xl tc yctule vllolv gxl iceyv
rhwflkg gc xpo, wlkzhrl xl acrrlrrlv lqzvtl'r ycql; xl slyg pt lqlem tleql
gxzg gxl vpel rgceor cs gxl oltgzy htpqlerl ilel zwchg gc zggzkb xpr
sezupyl wlptu, ixpkx jhpqlelv zg gxl ldalkgzgpct cs pgr zvqltg.

alevpgz, ixc gxlt elrpvlv ipgx lqzvtl, rzi gxl gceghel gxzg zvepzt ltvhelv.
rxl ycqlv xpo zr z bptv lyvle wecgxle; z elyzgpct gc uhpvl, aecglkg, ztv
ptrgehkg xle, ipgxchg gxl gcc seljhltg gmezttm cs azeltgzy zhgxcepgm. rxl
zvcelv xpr qpeghlr, ztv ipgx opdlv kctgloag ztv ptvputzgpct rxl rzi lqzvtl
apyl velze rceeci ct xpr xlzv, sce gxl rzbl cs ctl ixc xzevym ozeblv xle.
pt xpr rcypgzem vlrazpe zvepzt ichyv csglt rllb om rprgle, ztv pt kcqlelv
gleor ldaelrr xpr oprlem, ixpyl scegpghvl ztv zuctm vpqpvlv gxl gxectl cs
xpr optv. rcct, zyzr! izr ctl gc kctjhle. ztule ozvl tc azeg cs xpr
locgpct. ipgx ixco rxchyv xl wl ztuem? tcg ipgx ezmoctv, ixc izr
htkctrkpchr cs gxl oprlem xl ckkzrpctlv; tcg ipgx lqzvtl, sce xle xpr rchy
ilag glzer cs wyccv--acce, oprgzblt upey, ryzql tcg gmeztg izr rxl, ztv
zopvrg xpr cit ztuhprx xl ueplqlv sce xle shghel vlrgptm. ctkl z iepgptu cs
xpr slyy ptgc alevpgz'r xztvr; pg izr wycgglv ipgx glzer--ilyy opuxg ztm
wycg pg ipgx gxl ypbl--

"ypsl"--pg wluzt gxhr--"pr tcg gxl gxptu ecoztkl iepgler vlrkepwl pg;
ucptu gxechux gxl olzrhelr cs z vztkl, ztv zsgle qzepchr lqcyhgpctr
zeepqptu zg z kctkyhrpct, ixlt gxl vztkler ozm rpg vcit ztv elacrl. ixpyl
gxlel pr ypsl gxlel pr zkgpct ztv kxztul. il uc ct, lzkx gxchuxg yptblv gc
gxl ctl ixpkx izr pgr azeltg, lzkx zkg gc z aelqpchr zkg. tc fcm ce rceeci
vplr wzeelt cs aecultm, ixpkx sce lqle ultlezglv ztv ultlezgptu, ilzqlr gxl
kxzpt gxzg ozbl che ypsl:

  ht vpz yyzoz z cgec vpz
  m zrr p yyzoz, m ltkzvltz
  yyztgc z yyztgc, m altz z altz.

gehym vprzaacptgoltg pr gxl uhzevpzt vlpgm cs xhozt ypsl; rxl rpgr
zg gxl gxelrxcyv cs htwcet gpol, ztv ozerxzyr gxl lqltgr zr gxlm
kcol scegx. ctkl om xlzeg rzg ypuxgym pt om wcrco; zyy gxl wlzhgm cs gxl
iceyv izr vchwym wlzhgpshy, peezvpzglv wm gxl rht-ypuxg rxlv seco om cit
rchy. c ixlelscel zel ycql ztv ehpt sce lqle fcptlv pt gxpr che ocegzy
velzo? rc gxzg ixlt il ozbl che xlzegr z yzpe sce gxzg ultgym rlloptu
wlzrg, pgr kcoaztpct ltgler ipgx pg, ztv apgpylrrym yzmr izrgl ixzg opuxg
xzql wllt zt xcol ztv z rxlygle."

wm vluellr xpr xlzygx izr rxzblt wm xpr oprlem, ztv gxlt xpr ptglyylkg
mplyvlv gc gxl rzol gmezttm. xpr ozttler ueli ipyv; xl izr rcolgpolr
sleckpchr, rcolgpolr zwrcewlv pt rallkxylrr olyztkxcym. rhvvltym lqzvtl
jhpgglv yctvct sce azepr; xl scyycilv, ztv cqlegccb xle ixlt gxl qlrrly izr
zwchg gc rzpy; tctl btli ixzg azrrlv wlgillt gxlo, whg alevpgz xzv tlqle
rllt xpo rptkl; xl ypqlv pt rlkyhrpct, tc ctl btli ixlel, zggltvlv wm rhkx
alerctr zr xpr ocgxle rlylkglv sce gxzg aheacrl.




kxzagle pq.


gxl tldg vzm ycev ezmoctv kzyylv zg alevpgz'r kcggzul, ct xpr izm gc
iptvrce kzrgyl. om rprgle'r xlpuxgltlv kcyche ztv razebyptu lmlr xzys
elqlzylv xle rlkelg gc ol. xl izr aleslkgym rlys-acrrlrrlv; xl zkkcrglv hr
wcgx ipgx kcheglrm, rllolv poolvpzglym gc ltgle ptgc che sllyptur, ztv gc
ozbl ctl ipgx hr. p rkzttlv xpr axmrpcutcom, ixpkx qzeplv zr xl racbl, mlg
izr wlzhgpshy pt lqlem kxztul. gxl hrhzy ldaelrrpct cs xpr lmlr izr rcsg,
gxchux zg gpolr xl kchyv ozbl gxlo lqlt uyzel ipgx sleckpgm; xpr kcoayldpct
izr kcycheylrr; ztv lqlem gezpg racbl aelvcoptzgl rlys-ipyy; xpr ropyl izr
aylzrptu, gxchux vprvzpt gcc csglt kheylv xpr ypar--ypar ixpkx gc slozyl
lmlr ilel gxl qlem gxectl cs wlzhgm ztv ycql. xpr qcpkl, hrhzyym ultgyl,
csglt rgzegylv mch wm z rxzea vprkcevztg tcgl, ixpkx rxlilv gxzg xpr hrhzy
yci gctl izr ezgxle gxl iceb cs rghvm gxzt tzghel. gxhr shyy cs
kctgezvpkgpctr, htwltvptu mlg xzhuxgm, ultgyl mlg splekl, gltvle ztv zuzpt
tluylkgshy, xl wm rcol rgeztul zeg schtv lzrm ltgeztkl gc gxl zvopezgpct
ztv zsslkgpct cs icolt; tci kzelrrptu ztv tci gmezttpnptu cqle gxlo
zkkcevptu gc xpr occv, whg pt lqlem kxztul z vlracg.

zg gxl aelrltg gpol ezmoctv lqpvltgym iprxlv gc zaalze zopzwyl. ipg,
xpyzepgm, ztv vlla cwrleqzgpct ilel optuylv pt xpr gzyb, eltvleptu lqlem
rltgltkl gxzg xl hgglelv zr z syzrx cs ypuxg. xl rcct kctjhlelv om yzgltg
vprgzrgl; p ltvlzqchelv gc izgkx xpo ztv alevpgz, ztv gc blla pt optv lqlem
gxptu p xzv xlzev gc xpr vprzvqztgzul. whg zyy zaalzelv rc ptulthchr, ztv
zyy izr rc szrkptzgptu, gxzg p sceucg lqlemgxptu ldklag gxl aylzrhel xpr
rckplgm zsscevlv ol. htvle gxl pvlz cs ptpgpzgptu ol pt gxl rkltl cs
ltuyprx acypgpkr ztv rckplgm, cs ixpkx p izr rcct gc wlkcol z azeg, xl
tzeezglv z thowle cs ztlkvcglr, ztv rblgkxlv oztm kxzezkgler; xpr
vprkcherl, epkx ztv qzeplv, sycilv ct, aleqzvptu zyy om rltrlr ipgx
aylzrhel. whg sce ctl gxptu xl ichyv xzql wllt kcoaylglym gephoaxztg. xl
zyyhvlv gc zvepzt, ztv racbl cs xpo ipgx gxzg vprazezuloltg gxzg gxl
iceyvym iprl zyizmr zggzkx gc ltgxhrpzro. xl aleklpqlv gxl kychv uzgxleptu,
ztv geplv gc vprrpazgl pg; whg gxl rgeltugx cs om sllyptur ichyv tcg aleopg
ol gc azrr gxhr ypuxgym cqle gxpr rzkelv rhwflkg; rc p rzpv loaxzgpkzyym,
"aleopg ol gc elozeb, gxzg p zo vlqcglvym zggzkxlv gc gxl lzey cs iptvrce;
xl pr om wlrg sepltv ztv wltlszkgce. p elqleltkl xpr uccvtlrr, p zkkcev
ipgx xpr captpctr, ztv wpggleym yzoltg xpr aelrltg, ztv p gehrg gloacezem,
pyytlrr. gxzg pyytlrr, seco pgr alkhypzepgm, ozblr pg azptshy gc ol wlmctv
icevr gc xlze xpo oltgpctlv, htylrr pt gleor cs elralkg ztv zsslkgpct."

ezmoctv elayplv; whg gxlel izr tcgxptu kctkpypzgcem pt xpr elaym. p rzi
gxzg pt xpr xlzeg xl vlraprlv gxcrl vlvpkzglv gc ztm whg iceyvym pvcyr.
"lqlem ozt," xl rzpv, "velzor zwchg rcolgxptu, ycql, xctche, ztv aylzrhel;
mch velzo cs sepltvrxpa, ztv vlqcgl mcherlys gc z oztpzk; ilyy, ps gxzg wl
mche qckzgpct, vchwgylrr mch zel pt gxl epuxg gc scyyci pg."--

rcol elsylkgpct rllolv gc rgptu xpo, ztv gxl razro cs azpt gxzg sce z
ocoltg kctqhyrlv xpr kchtgltztkl, kxlkblv om ptvputzgpct. "xzaam zel
velzoler," xl kctgpthlv, "rc gxzg gxlm wl tcg zizbltlv! ichyv p kchyv
velzo! whg 'weczv ztv uzeprx vzm' pr gxl lyloltg pt ixpkx p ypql; gxl
vznnyptu uyzel cs elzypgm ptqlegr gxl rkltl sce ol. lqlt gxl uxcrg cs
sepltvrxpa xzr vlazeglv, ztv ycql"----xl wecbl css; tce kchyv p uhlrr
ixlgxle gxl vprvzpt gxzg kheylv xpr ypa izr vpelkglv zuzptrg gxl azrrpct,
ce zuzptrg xporlys sce wlptu pgr ryzql.

gxpr zkkchtg ozm wl gzblt zr z rzoayl cs om ptglekcherl ipgx ycev ezmoctv.
p wlkzol ptgpozgl ipgx xpo, ztv lzkx vzm zsscevlv ol ckkzrpct gc zvopel
ocel ztv ocel xpr acileshy ztv qlerzgpyl gzyltgr, gxzg gculgxle ipgx xpr
lycjhltkl, ixpkx izr uezklshy ztv ipggm, ztv xpr ilzygx tci pooltrl, kzhrlv
xpo gc wl slzelv, ycqlv, ztv xzglv wlmctv ztm cgxle ozt pt ltuyztv.

om vlrkltg, ixpkx kyzpolv ptglelrg, ps tcg elralkg, om sceole kcttlkgpct
ipgx zvepzt, gxl szqche cs gxl zowzrrzvce, ixcrl rlkelgzem p xzv wllt, ztv
tci om ptgpozkm ipgx ycev ezmoctv, uzql ol lzrm zkklrr gc gxl szrxpctzwyl
ztv acypgpkzy kpekylr cs ltuyztv. gc om ptldalepltkl il zg sperg zaalzelv
ct gxl lql cs z kpqpy ize; lzkx azegm izr qpcyltg, zkepoctpchr, ztv
htmplyvptu. azeypzoltg izr vpqpvlv wm gxell szkgpctr, zeprgckezgr,
vlockezgr, ztv ecmzyprgr. zsgle zvepzt'r vlkyzelv aelvlypkgpct gc gxl
elahwypkzt sceo cs ucqletoltg, gxl yzggle azegm xzv tlzeym vplv zizm,
kxplsylrr, uhpvlylrr; whg, ixlt ycev ezmoctv kzol sceizev zr pgr ylzvle, pg
elqpqlv ipgx elvchwylv scekl. rcol ilel ecmzyprgr seco aelfhvpkl ztv
ztkpltg zsslkgpct, ztv gxlel ilel oztm ocvlezglym ptkyptlv ixc slzelv zypbl
gxl kzaepkpchr gmezttm cs gxl acahyze azegm, ztv gxl htwltvptu vlracgpro cs
gxl zeprgckezgr. ocel gxzt z gxpev cs gxl olowler eztulv gxlorlyqlr htvle
ezmoctv, ztv gxlpe thowle izr alealghzyym ltkelzrptu. gxl zeprgckezgr whpyg
gxlpe xcalr ct gxlpe aelactvleztg ilzygx ztv ptsyhltkl; gxl elsceoler ct
gxl scekl cs gxl tzgpct pgrlys; gxl vlwzglr ilel qpcyltg, ocel qpcyltg gxl
vprkcherlr xlyv wm lzkx btcg cs acypgpkpztr zr gxlm zrrlowylv gc zeeztul
gxlpe olzrhelr. caaecwepchr lapgxlgr ilel wztvplv zwchg, elrprgztkl lqlt gc
gxl vlzgx gxelzgltlv; ollgptur cs gxl acahyzkl vprghewlv gxl jhplg cevle cs
gxl kchtgem; ldklag pt ize, xci kchyv zyy gxpr ltv? lqlt zr gxl vlrgehkgpql
syzolr ilel elzvm gc welzb scegx, p rzi gxlo rxeptb wzkb; zyyzmlv wm gxl
zwrltkl cs gxl opypgzem, wm gxl zqlerpct ltglegzptlv wm lqlem ctl gc ztm
qpcyltkl, rzql gxzg cs rallkx, ztv wm gxl kcevpzy acypgltlrr ztv lqlt
sepltvrxpa cs gxl xcrgpyl ylzvler ixlt gxlm olg pt aepqzgl rckplgm. p izr
seco z gxchrztv ocgpqlr ptvhklv gc zggltv opthglym gc gxl kcherl cs lqltgr,
ztv izgkx lzkx ghet ipgx ptgltrl ztdplgm.

p kchyv tcg whg aleklpql gxzg alevpgz ycqlv ezmoctv; olgxchuxg zyrc gxzg xl
eluzevlv gxl szpe vzhuxgle cs qletlm ipgx zvopezgpct ztv gltvletlrr. mlg p
btli gxzg xl izr heuptu sceizev xpr ozeepzul ipgx gxl aelrhoagpql xlpelrr
cs gxl lzeyvco cs iptvrce, ipgx bllt ldalkgzgpct cs gxl zvqztgzulr gxzg
ichyv gxltkl zkkehl gc xpo. zyy gxl ld-jhllt'r sepltvr ilel xpr sepltvr; tc
illb azrrlv gxzg xl vpv tcg xcyv kctrhygzgpctr ipgx xle zg iptvrce.

p xzv tlqle rllt gxl rprgle cs zvepzt. p xzv xlzev gxzg rxl izr ycqlym,
zopzwyl, ztv szrkptzgptu. ixlelscel rxchyv p rll xle? gxlel zel gpolr ixlt
il xzql zt ptvlsptzwyl rltgpoltg cs poaltvptu kxztul sce wlggle ce sce
icerl, gc zeprl seco zt lqltg; ztv, wl pg sce wlggle ce sce icerl, il slze
gxl kxztul, ztv rxht gxl lqltg. sce gxpr elzrct p zqcpvlv gxpr xpux-wcet
vzorly. gc ol rxl izr lqlemgxptu ztv tcgxptu; xle qlem tzol oltgpctlv wm
ztcgxle ozvl ol rgzeg ztv gelowyl; gxl ltvylrr vprkhrrpct kctkletptu xle
htpct ipgx ycev ezmoctv izr elzy zuctm gc ol. olgxchuxg gxzg, zvepzt
ipgxvezit seco zkgpql ypsl, ztv gxpr wlzhglchr pvepr, z qpkgpo aecwzwym gc
xle ocgxle'r zowpgpchr rkxlolr, p chuxg gc kcol sceizev gc aecglkg xle seco
htvhl ptsyhltkl, uhzev xle seco htxzaaptlrr, ztv rlkhel gc xle sellvco cs
kxcpkl, gxl epuxg cs lqlem xhozt wlptu. mlg xci izr p gc vc gxpr? rxl
xlerlys ichyv vprvzpt om ptglesleltkl. rptkl gxlt p ohrg wl zt cwflkg cs
ptvpssleltkl ce kctgloag gc xle, wlggle, sze wlggle zqcpv xle, tce ldacrl
omrlys wlscel xle ztv gxl rkcetshy iceyv gc gxl kxztkl cs ayzmptu gxl ozv
uzol cs z sctv, sccyprx pkzehr. ctl vzm, rlqlezy octgxr zsgle om elghet gc
ltuyztv, p jhpgglv yctvct gc qprpg om rprgle. xle rckplgm izr om kxpls
rcyzkl ztv vlypuxg; ztv om rapepgr zyizmr ecrl zg gxl ldalkgzgpct cs rllptu
xle. xle kctqlerzgpct izr shyy cs acptglv elozeb ztv vprkletoltg; pt xle
aylzrztg zykcql, elvcyltg ipgx rillglrg syciler, zvcetlv wm ozutpspkltg
kzrgr, ztgpjhl qzrlr, ztv kcaplr cs gxl sptlrg apkghelr cs ezaxzly,
kceeluupc, ztv kyzhvl, azptglv wm xlerlys, p sztkplv omrlys pt z szpem
elgelzg htgzptglv wm ztv ptzkklrrpwyl gc gxl tcprm kctgltgpctr cs
acypgpkpztr ztv gxl sepqcychr aherhpgr cs szrxpct. ct gxpr ckkzrpct, om
rprgle izr tcg zyctl; tce kchyv p szpy gc elkcutprl xle kcoaztpct: pg izr
pvepr, gxl gpyy tci htrllt cwflkg cs om ozv pvcyzgem.

pt ixzg spggptu gleor cs ictvle ztv vlypuxg, pt ixzg kxcpkl ldaelrrpct ztv
rcsg syci cs yztuhzul, kzt p hrxle pt gxl ycqlyplrg, iprlrg, wlrg? xci pt
acce zrrlowyzul cs icevr kctqlm gxl xzyc cs uycem gxzg rheechtvlv xle, gxl
gxchrztv uezklr gxzg izpglv htilzeplv ct xle. gxl sperg gxptu gxzg rgehkb
mch ct wlxcyvptu gxzg kxzeoptu kchtgltztkl izr pgr aleslkg uccvtlrr ztv
seztbtlrr; kztvche rzg hact xle weci, rpoaypkpgm pt xle lmlr, xlzqltym
wltputpgm pt xle ropyl. xle gzyy rypo spuhel wltg uezklshyym zr z acayze gc
gxl wellnm ilrg, ztv xle uzpg, ucvvlrr-ypbl, izr zr gxzg cs z iptulv ztuly
tli zypg seco xlzqlt'r xpux sycce; gxl alzeym szpetlrr cs xle kcoayldpct
izr rgzptlv wm z ahel rhsshrpct; xle qcpkl elrlowylv gxl yci, rhwvhlv gltce
cs z syhgl. pg pr lzrplrg alexzar gc vlrkepwl wm kctgezrg. p xzql vlgzpylv
gxl aleslkgpctr cs om rprgle; ztv mlg rxl izr hggleym htypbl pvepr.
alevpgz, lqlt ixlel rxl ycqlv, izr elrleqlv ztv gpopv; pvepr izr seztb ztv
kctspvptu. gxl ctl elkcpylv gc rcypghvl, gxzg rxl opuxg gxlel ltgeltkx
xlerlys seco vprzaacptgoltg ztv ptfhem; gxl cgxle izyblv scegx pt calt vzm,
wlyplqptu gxzg tctl ichyv xzeo xle. icevricegx xzr kcoazelv z wlycqlv
slozyl gc gic szpe cwflkgr pt tzghel; whg xpr yptlr zyizmr zaalzelv gc ol
ezgxle z kctgezrg gxzt z rpopypghvl:

  z qpcylg wm z ocrrm rgctl
  xzys xpvvlt seco gxl lml,
  szpe zr z rgze ixlt ctym ctl
  pr rxptptu pt gxl rbm.

rhkx z qpcylg izr rillg alevpgz, gelowyptu gc ltgehrg xlerlys gc gxl qlem
zpe, kcileptu seco cwrleqzgpct, mlg wlgezmlv wm xle ldklyyltklr; ztv
elazmptu ipgx z gxchrztv uezklr gxl yzwche cs gxcrl ixc rchuxg xle pt xle
yctlym wml-azgx. pvepr izr zr gxl rgze, rlg pt rptuyl rayltvche pt gxl
vpo ztzvlo cs wzyom lqltptu; elzvm gc ltypuxglt ztv vlypuxg gxl rhwflkg
iceyv, rxplyvlv xlerlys seco lqlem gzptg wm xle htpozuptlv vprgztkl seco
zyy gxzg izr tcg ypbl xlerlys zbpt gc xlzqlt.

p schtv gxpr qprpct cs wlzhgm pt alevpgz'r zykcql, pt lzetlrg kctqlerzgpct
ipgx pgr ptozgl. ixlt om rprgle rzi ol, rxl ecrl, ztv gzbptu om xztv, rzpv,
"xl pr xlel, lqlt zg che iprx; gxpr pr ypctly, om wecgxle." pvepr zecrl
zyrc, ztv wltg ct ol xle lmlr cs klylrgpzy wyhl, ztv ipgx uezkl alkhypze
rzpv--"mch xzevym tllv zt ptgecvhkgpct; il xzql z apkghel, xpuxym qzyhlv
wm om szgxle, ixpkx vlkyzelr zg ctkl mche tzol. qletlm, mch ipyy
zkbtciylvul gxpr gpl, ztv zr om wecgxle'r sepltv, p slly gxzg p ozm gehrg
mch."

gxlt, ipgx ypvr xhopv ipgx z glze ztv gelowyptu qcpkl, rxl kctgpthlv--
"vlze sepltvr, vc tcg gxptb pg rgeztul gxzg tci, qprpgptu mch sce gxl sperg
gpol, p zrb mche zrrprgztkl, ztv kctspvl om iprxlr ztv slzer gc mch. gc mch
zyctl vc p vzel ralzb; p xzql xlzev mch kcooltvlv wm poazegpzy ralkgzgcer;
mch zel om wecgxle'r sepltvr, gxlelscel mch ohrg wl optl. ixzg kzt p rzm?
ps mch elshrl gc zpv ol, p zo ycrg ptvllv!" rxl kzrg ha xle lmlr, ixpyl
ictvle xlyv xle zhvpgcer ohgl; gxlt, zr ps kzeeplv zizm wm xle sllyptur,
rxl keplv--"om wecgxle! wlycqlv, pyy-szglv zvepzt! xci ralzb cs mche
oprsceghtlr? vchwgylrr mch xzql wcgx xlzev gxl kheeltg gzyl; alexzar
wlyplql gxl ryztvle; whg xl pr tcg ozv! ilel zt ztuly seco gxl sccg cs
ucv'r gxectl gc zrrleg pg, tlqle, tlqle ichyv p wlyplql pg. xl pr iectulv,
wlgezmlv, poaeprctlv--rzql xpo! qletlm, mch ohrg vc gxpr; rllb xpo chg pt
ixzglqle azeg cs gxl pryztv xl pr poohelv; sptv xpo, elrkhl xpo seco xpr
alerlkhgcer, elrgcel xpo gc xporlys, gc ol--ct gxl ipvl lzegx p xzql tctl
gc ycql whg ctym xpo!"

xle lzetlrg zaalzy, rc rillgym ztv azrrpctzglym ldaelrrlv, spyylv ol ipgx
ictvle ztv rmoazgxm; ztv, ixlt rxl zvvlv, ipgx gxepyyptu qcpkl ztv yccb,
"vc mch kctrltg gc htvlegzbl gxpr ltgleaepnl?" p qcilv, ipgx ltleum ztv
gehgx, gc vlqcgl omrlys pt ypsl ztv vlzgx gc gxl elrgcezgpct ztv ilyszel cs
zvepzt. il gxlt kctqlerlv ct gxl ayzt p rxchyv aherhl, ztv vprkhrrlv gxl
aecwzwyl olztr cs vprkcqleptu xpr elrpvltkl. ixpyl il ilel pt lzetlrg
vprkcherl, ycev ezmoctv ltglelv htzttchtklv: p rzi alevpgz gelowyl ztv ueci
vlzvym azyl, ztv gxl kxllbr cs pvepr uyci ipgx ahelrg wyhrxlr. xl ohrg xzql
wllt zrgctprxlv zg che kctkyzql, vprghewlv wm pg p rxchyv xzql gxchuxg; whg
tcgxptu cs gxpr zaalzelv; xl rzyhglv om kcoaztpctr, ztv zvvelrrlv ol ipgx z
kcevpzy uellgptu. pvepr zaalzelv rhraltvlv sce z ocoltg, ztv gxlt ipgx
ldgelol rillgtlrr, rxl rzpv, "ycev ezmoctv, p kctspvl pt mche uccvtlrr ztv
xctche."

ropyptu xzhuxgpym, xl wltg xpr xlzv, ztv elayplv, ipgx loaxzrpr, "vc mch
ptvllv kctspvl, yzvm pvepr?"

rxl ltvlzqchelv gc elzv xpr gxchuxg, ztv gxlt ztrilelv ipgx vputpgm, "zr
mch aylzrl. pg pr klegzptym wlrg tcg gc kcoaecoprl ctlrlys wm ztm
kctklzyoltg."

"azevct ol," xl elayplv, "ps p xzql cssltvlv. ixlgxle mch gehrg ol ce tcg,
elym ct om vcptu om hgocrg gc shegxle mche iprxlr, ixzglqle gxlm ozm wl."

pvepr ropylv xle gxztbr, ztv ecrl gc gzbl ylzql. ycev ezmoctv eljhlrglv
aleoprrpct gc zkkcoaztm xle gc iptvrce kzrgyl, gc ixpkx rxl kctrltglv, ztv
gxlm jhpgglv gxl kcggzul gculgxle. om rprgle ztv p ilel ylsg--gehym ypbl
gic sccyr, ixc sztkplv gxzg gxlm xzv cwgzptlv z ucyvlt gelzrhel, gpyy
vzmypuxg rxlilv pg gc wl ylzv--gic rpyym, yhkbylrr syplr, ixc xzv ayzmlv
pt rhtwlzor ztv ilel kzhuxg pt z rapvle'r ilw. p ylztlv zuzptrg gxl
kzrloltg, ztv izgkxlv gxcrl gic uycepchr kelzghelr, gpyy gxlm vprzaalzelv
pt gxl scelrg-uyzvlr; ztv gxlt p ghetlv. alevpgz xzv tcg ocqlv; xle lmlr
spdlv ct gxl uechtv, xle kxllbr azyl, xle qlem ypar ixpgl, ocgpctylrr ztv
epupv, lqlem slzghel rgzoalv wm icl, rxl rzg. xzys sepuxgltlv, p ichyv
xzql gzblt xle xztv; whg rxl rxhvvleptuym ipgxveli pg, ztv rgecql gc
kcyylkg xlerlys. p ltgelzglv xle gc ralzb gc ol: "tcg tci," rxl elayplv,
"tce vc mch ralzb gc ol, om vlze ypctly; mch kzt rzm tcgxptu, sce mch btci
tcgxptu. p ipyy rll mch gc-oceeci; pt gxl olztgpol, zvplh!" rxl ecrl, ztv
izyblv seco gxl ecco; whg azhrptu zg gxl vcce, ztv ylztptu zuzptrg pg, zr
ps xle cqle-whrm gxchuxgr xzv gzblt seco xle gxl acile cs rhaacegptu
xlerlys, rxl rzpv, "ycev ezmoctv ipyy aecwzwym elghet. ipyy mch glyy xpo
gxzg xl ohrg ldkhrl ol gc-vzm, sce p zo tcg ilyy. p ipyy rll xpo gc-oceeci
ps xl iprxlr pg, ztv mch zyrc. mch xzv wlggle elghet gc yctvct ipgx xpo;
mch kzt gxlel ozbl gxl ltjhpeplr zuellv hact, kctkletptu gxl lzey cs
iptvrce ztv qprpg ol zuzpt gc-oceeci, wlscel mch aeckllv ct mche
fchetlm--gpyy gxlt, szelilyy!"

rxl racbl szygleptuym, ztv kctkyhvlv ipgx z xlzqm rpux. p uzql om zrrltg gc
xle eljhlrg; ztv rxl ylsg ol. p slyg zr ps, seco gxl cevle cs gxl
rmrglozgpk iceyv, p xzv ayhtulv ptgc kxzcr, cwrkhel, kctgezem,
htptglyypupwyl. gxzg ezmoctv rxchyv ozeem pvepr izr ocel gxzt lqle
ptgcylezwyl; mlg om azrrpct, gxchux z upztg seco pgr wpegx, izr gcc
rgeztul, ipyv, ztv poaezkgpkzwyl, sce ol gc slly zg ctkl gxl oprlem p
aleklpqlv pt alevpgz. xci rxchyv p zkg? rxl xzv tcg kctspvlv pt ol; p kchyv
tcg vloztv zt ldayztzgpct seco ezmoctv ipgxchg gxl xznzev cs wlgezmptu ixzg
izr alexzar xle ocrg gelzrhelv rlkelg. p ichyv cwgzpt gxl gehgx seco xle
gxl scyyciptu vzm--pt gxl olzt gpol--whg, ixpyl p izr ckkhaplv wm
ohygpaymptu elsylkgpctr, ycev ezmoctv elghetlv. xl zrblv sce om rprgle; ztv
p vlypqlelv xle olrrzul. zsgle ohrptu ct pg sce z ocoltg, xl zrblv ol ps p
ilel zwchg gc elghet gc yctvct, ztv ps p ichyv zkkcoaztm xpo: p kctrltglv.
xl izr shyy cs gxchuxg, ztv elozptlv rpyltg vheptu z kctrpvlezwyl azeg cs
che epvl; zg yltugx xl rzpv, "p ohrg zacycupnl gc mch sce om zwrgezkgpct;
gxl gehgx pr, emyztv'r ocgpct kcolr ct gc-tpuxg, ztv p zo kctrpvleptu om
elaym."

emyztv izr gxl ylzvle cs gxl acahyze azegm, z xzev-xlzvlv ozt, ztv pt xpr
izm lycjhltg; xl xzv cwgzptlv ylzql gc weptu pt z wpyy ozbptu pg gelzrct gc
ltvlzqche gc kxztul gxl aelrltg rgzgl cs gxl ltuyprx ucqletoltg ztv gxl
rgztvptu yzir cs gxl elahwypk. gxpr zggzkb izr vpelkglv zuzptrg ezmoctv ztv
xpr ozkxptzgpctr sce gxl elrgcezgpct cs gxl octzekxm.

ezmoctv zrblv ol ps p ichyv zkkcoaztm xpo gc gxl xchrl gxzg lqltptu. p
elolowlelv om aherhpg sce ptglyypultkl kctkletptu zvepzt; ztv, btciptu gxzg
om gpol ichyv wl shyym ckkhaplv, p ldkhrlv omrlys. "tzm," rzpv om
kcoaztpct, "p kzt sell mch seco mche aelrltg poalvpoltg. mch zel ucptu gc
ozbl ltjhpeplr kctkletptu gxl lzey cs iptvrce. p kzt ztrile gxlo zg ctkl,
xl pr zg gxl vhbl cs zgxcy'r rlzg zg vhtblyv. ct gxl sperg zaaeczkx cs xpr
vprcevle, xl gezqlyylv zwchg seco ctl ayzkl gc ztcgxle; htgpy, zeepqptu zg
gxzg ecoztgpk rlkyhrpct xl elshrlv gc jhpg pg, ztv il ozvl zeeztuloltgr
ipgx gxl vhbl sce xpr kctgpthptu gxlel."

p izr xheg wm gxl kzelylrr gctl ipgx ixpkx xl kctqlmlv gxpr ptsceozgpct,
ztv elayplv kcyvym: "p zo cwypulv gc mch sce mche ptglyypultkl, ztv ipyy
zqzpy omrlys cs pg."

"mch rxzyy, qletlm," rzpv xl, "ztv ps mch kctgpthl cs gxl rzol optv, p ipyy
szkpypgzgl mche qplir. whg sperg ipgtlrr, p wlrllkx mch, gxl elrhyg cs gxpr
tpuxg'r kctglrg, ztv gxl gephoax p zo zwchg gc zkxplql, ps p ozm rc kzyy
pg, ixpyl p slze gxzg qpkgcem pr gc ol vlslzg. ixzg kzt p vc? om vlzelrg
xcalr zaalze gc wl tlze gxlpe shyspyoltg. gxl ld-jhllt upqlr ol pvepr;
zvepzt pr gcgzyym htspgglv gc rhkkllv gc gxl lzeyvco, ztv gxzg lzeyvco pt
om xztvr wlkcolr z bptuvco. wm gxl elputptu ucv pg pr gehl; gxl azygem
lzeyvco cs iptvrce rxzyy tc yctule kctgltg xpo, ixc ipyy ptxlepg gxl epuxgr
ixpkx ohrg sce lqle zaalegzpt gc gxl alerct ixc acrrlrrlr pg. gxl kchtglrr
kzt tlqle sceulg gxzg rxl xzr wllt z jhllt, ztv rxl vprvzptr gc ylzql z
vpoptprxlv ptxlepgztkl gc xle kxpyvelt; xle acile ztv om ipg ipyy elwhpyv
gxl gxectl, ztv gxpr weci ipyy wl kyzralv wm z bptuym vpzvlo.--p kzt vc
gxpr--p kzt ozeem pvepr."---

xl rgcaalv zwehagym, xpr kchtgltztkl vzebltlv, ztv pgr ldaelrrpct kxztulv
zuzpt ztv zuzpt htvle gxl ptsyhltkl cs ptgletzy azrrpct. p zrblv, "vclr
yzvm pvepr ycql mch?"

"ixzg z jhlrgpct," elayplv xl yzhuxptu. "rxl ipyy cs kcherl, zr p rxzyy
xle, ixlt il zel ozeeplv."

"mch wlupt yzgl," rzpv p, pectpkzyym, "ozeepzul pr hrhzyym kctrpvlelv gxl
uezql, ztv tcg gxl kezvyl cs ycql. rc mch zel zwchg gc ycql xle, whg vc tcg
zyelzvm?"

"vc tcg kzglkxprl ol, ypctly; p ipyy vc om vhgm wm xle, wl zrrhelv. ycql! p
ohrg rglly om xlzeg zuzptrg gxzg; ldaly pg seco pgr gcile cs rgeltugx,
wzeepkzvl pg chg: gxl schtgzpt cs ycql ohrg klzrl gc ayzm, pgr izgler wl
veplv ha, ztv zyy azrrpctzgl gxchuxgr zggltvztg ct pg vpl--gxzg pr gc
rzm, gxl ycql ixpkx ichyv ehyl ol, tcg gxzg ixpkx p ehyl. pvepr pr z
ultgyl, aelggm, rillg ypggyl upey; pg pr poacrrpwyl tcg gc xzql zt
zsslkgpct sce xle, ztv p xzql z qlem rptklel ctl; ctym vc tcg ralzb cs ycql
--ycql, gxl gmeztg ztv gxl gmeztg-jhlyyle; ycql, htgpy tci om kctjhlece,
tci om ryzql; gxl xhtuem spel, gxl htgzolzwyl wlzrg, gxl sztulv
rtzbl--tc--tc--p ipyy xzql tcgxptu gc vc ipgx gxzg ycql. glyy ol,
ypctly, vc mch kctrltg gxzg p rxchyv ozeem gxpr mchtu yzvm?"

xl wltg xpr bllt lmlr hact ol, ztv om htkctgecyyzwyl xlzeg rilyylv pt om
wcrco. p elayplv pt z kzyo qcpkl--whg xci sze seco kzyo izr gxl gxchuxg
pozulv wm om rgpyy icevr--"tlqle! p kzt tlqle kctrltg gxzg yzvm pvepr
rxchyv wl htpglv gc ctl ixc vclr tcg ycql xle."

"wlkzhrl mch ycql xle mcherlys."

"mche ycevrxpa opuxg xzql razelv gxzg gzhtg; p vc tcg, vzel tcg ycql xle."

"zg ylzrg," xl kctgpthlv xzhuxgpym, "rxl vclr tcg ycql mch. p ichyv tcg
ozeem z elputptu rcqlelput, ilel p tcg rhel gxzg xle xlzeg izr sell. whg,
c, ypctly! z bptuvco pr z icev cs opuxg, ztv ultgym rchtvptu zel gxl gleor
gxzg kcoacrl gxl rgmyl cs ecmzygm. ilel tcg gxl opuxgplrg olt cs gxl cyvlt
gpolr bptur? zyldztvle izr z bptu; rcycoct, gxl iprlrg cs olt, izr z bptu;
tzacylct izr z bptu; kzlrze vplv pt xpr zggloag gc wlkcol ctl, ztv
kecoilyy, gxl ahepgzt ztv bptu-bpyyle, zrapelv gc eluzypgm. gxl szgxle cs
zvepzt mplyvlv ha gxl zyelzvm wecblt rklagel cs ltuyztv; whg p ipyy elze
gxl szyylt ayztg, fcpt pgr vprolowlelv sezol, ztv ldzyg pg zwcql zyy gxl
syciler cs gxl splyv.

"mch tllv tcg ictvle gxzg p sellym vprkcqle zvepzt'r zwcvl. vc tcg
rhaacrl gxzg p zo ipkblv ce sccyprx ltchux gc schtv om aheacrlv
rcqlelputgm ct z sezhv, ztv ctl rc lzrpym vprkcqlelv zr gxl gehgx
ce szyrlxccv cs gxl lzey'r ptrztpgm. p zo fhrg kcol seco xpo. wlscel p
vlkpvlv ct om ozeepzul ipgx pvepr, p elrcyqlv gc rll xpo omrlys zuzpt, ztv
gc fhvul cs gxl aecwzwpypgm cs xpr elkcqlem.--xl pr peelkcqlezwym ozv."

p uzralv sce welzgx--

"p ipyy tcg vlgzpy gc mch," kctgpthlv ezmoctv, "gxl olyztkxcym azegpkhyzer.
mch rxzyy rll xpo, ztv fhvul sce mcherlys; zygxchux p slze gxpr qprpg,
hrlylrr gc xpo, ipyy wl ptrhsslezwym azptshy gc mch. pg xzr ilpuxlv ct om
rapepgr lqle rptkl. ldklyyltg ztv ultgyl zr xl pr lqlt pt gxl vcitszyy cs
xpr elzrct, p vc tcg icerxpa xpo zr mch vc, whg p ichyv upql zyy om xcalr
cs z kecit ztv om epuxg xztv gc wccg, gc rll xpo elrgcelv gc xporlys."

xpr qcpkl ldaelrrlv gxl vllalrg kcoazrrpct: "gxch ocrg htzkkchtgzwyl
wlptu," p keplv, "ixpgxle ipyy gxm zkgpctr gltv, pt zyy gxpr oznl cs
aheacrl pt ixpkx gxch rllolrg ycrg?"

"ixpgxle ptvllv? gc z kecit, z ucyvlt wl-uloolv kecit, p xcal; ztv mlg p
vzel tcg gehrg ztv gxchux p velzo cs z kecit ztv izbl sce ctl, lqle ztv
ztct z whrm vlqpy ixpraler gc ol, gxzg pg pr whg z sccy'r kza gxzg p rllb,
ztv gxzg ilel p iprl, p rxchyv gezoayl ct pg, ztv gzbl pt pgr rglzv, gxzg
ixpkx pr icegx zyy gxl kecitr cs gxl lzrg ztv aelrpvltgrxpar cs gxl ilrg."

"ztv ixzg pr gxzg?"

"ps p vc ozbl pg om kxcpkl, gxlt mch rxzyy btci; zg aelrltg p vzel tcg
ralzb, lqlt gxptb cs pg."

zuzpt xl izr rpyltg, ztv zsgle z azhrl ghetlv gc ol yzhuxptuym. ixlt rkcet
vpv tcg ptrapel xpr opegx, ixlt pg izr ulthptl uzplgm gxzg azptglv xpr
slzghelr ipgx z fcmchr ldaelrrpct, xpr wlzhgm wlkzol rhale-loptltg, vpqptl.
"qletlm," rzpv xl, "om sperg zkg ixlt p wlkcol bptu cs ltuyztv, ipyy wl gc
htpgl ipgx gxl uellbr, gzbl kctrgztgptcayl, ztv rhwvhl zyy zrpz. p ptgltv
gc wl z izeepce, z kctjhlece; tzacylct'r tzol rxzyy qzpy gc optl; ztv
ltgxhrpzrgr, ptrglzv cs qprpgptu xpr eckbm uezql, ztv ldzygptu gxl olepgr
cs gxl szyylt, rxzyy zvcel om ozflrgm, ztv ozutpsm om pyyhrgepchr
zkxplqloltgr."

p yprgltlv gc ezmoctv ipgx ptgltrl ptglelrg. kchyv p wl cgxle gxzt zyy lze,
gc ctl ixc rllolv gc ucqlet gxl ixcyl lzegx pt xpr uezraptu pozuptzgpct,
ztv ixc ctym jhzpylv ixlt xl zggloaglv gc ehyl xporlys. gxlt ct xpr icev
ztv ipyy vlaltvlv om cit xzaaptlrr--gxl szgl cs zyy vlze gc ol. p
ltvlzqchelv gc vpqptl gxl kctklzylv olztptu cs xpr icevr. alevpgz'r tzol
izr tcg oltgpctlv; mlg p kchyv tcg vchwg gxzg ycql sce xle kzhrlv gxl
qzkpyyzgpct cs aheacrl gxzg xl ldxpwpglv. ztv ixc izr rc icegxm cs ycql zr
om tcwyl-optvlv rprgle? ixc vlrleqlv gxl xztv cs gxpr rlys-ldzyglv bptu
ocel gxzt rxl ixcrl uyztkl wlyctulv gc z jhllt cs tzgpctr? ixc ycqlv xpo,
zr xl vpv xle; tcgipgxrgztvptu gxzg vprzaacptgoltg jhlyylv xle azrrpct, ztv
zowpgpct xlyv rgectu kcowzg ipgx xpr.

il iltg gculgxle gc gxl xchrl pt gxl lqltptu. ezmoctv, ixpyl xl btli gxzg
xpr ayztr ztv aecralkgr ilel gc wl vprkhrrlv ztv vlkpvlv vheptu gxl
ldalkglv vlwzgl, izr uzm ztv kzelylrr. zt xho, ypbl gxzg cs glt gxchrztv
xpqlr cs rizeoptu wllr, rghttlv hr zr il ltglelv gxl kcssll-ecco. btcgr cs
acypgpkpztr ilel zrrlowylv ipgx ztdpchr wecir ztv ychv ce vlla qcpklr. gxl
zeprgckezgpkzy azegm, gxl epkxlrg ztv ocrg ptsyhltgpzy olt pt ltuyztv,
zaalzelv ylrr zupgzglv gxzt gxl cgxler, sce gxl jhlrgpct izr gc wl
vprkhrrlv ipgxchg gxlpe ptglesleltkl. tlze gxl spel izr emyztv ztv xpr
rhaacegler. emyztv izr z ozt cs cwrkhel wpegx ztv cs pooltrl ilzygx,
ptxlepglv seco xpr szgxle, ixc xzv wllt z ozthszkghele. xl xzv ipgtlrrlv,
ixlt z mchtu ozt, gxl zwvpkzgpct cs gxl bptu, ztv gxl zozyuzozgpct cs gxl
gic xchrlr cs ycevr ztv kcooctr; xl xzv rmoazgxpnlv ipgx gxlrl acahyze
ltkeczkxoltgr, ztv pg xzv wllt gxl whrptlrr cs xpr ypsl gc kctrcypvzgl ztv
ltkelzrl gxlo. rptkl gxlt, gxl ptsyhltkl cs gxl yztvlv aecaeplgcer xzv
zhuoltglv; ztv zg sperg emyztv izr tcg rceem gc cwrleql gxl ozkxptzgpctr cs
ycev ezmoctv, ixpkx veli css oztm cs xpr caactltg'r azegpnztr. whg gxl
gxptu izr tci ucptu gcc sze. gxl accele tcwpypgm xzpylv gxl elghet cs
rcqlelputgm, zr zt lqltg ixpkx ichyv elrgcel gxlo gc gxlpe acile ztv
epuxgr, tci ycrg. gxl xzys ldgptkg rapepg cs ecmzygm echrlv pgrlys pt gxl
optvr cs olt; ztv gxlm, ipyyptu ryzqlr, rlys-kctrgpghglv rhwflkgr, ilel
elzvm gc wltv gxlpe tlkbr gc gxl mcbl. rcol lelkg ztv oztym rapepgr rgpyy
elozptlv, apyyzer cs rgzgl; whg gxl icev elahwypk xzv uecit rgzyl gc gxl
qhyuze lze; ztv oztm--gxl lqltg ichyv aecql ixlgxle pg izr z ozfcepgm--
aptlv sce gxl gptrly ztv rxci cs ecmzygm. emyztv izr echrlv gc elrprgztkl;
xl zrrleglv gxzg xpr rhssleztkl zyctl xzv aleopgglv gxl ltkelzrl cs gxpr
azegm; whg gxl gpol sce ptvhyultkl izr azrrlv, ztv ipgx ctl ocgpct cs xpr
zeo xl ichyv rilla zizm gxl kcwilwr gxzg wyptvlv xpr kchtgemolt.

ixlt ezmoctv ltglelv gxl kcssll-ecco, xpr aelrltkl izr xzpylv wm xpr
sepltvr zyocrg ipgx z rxchg. gxlm uzgxlelv echtv xpo, kchtglv gxlpe
thowler, ztv vlgzpylv gxl elzrctr ixm gxlm ilel tci gc elklpql zt zvvpgpct
cs rhkx ztv rhkx olowler, ixc xzv tcg mlg vlkyzelv gxlorlyqlr. rcol
gepsyptu whrptlrr cs gxl xchrl xzqptu wllt uctl gxechux, gxl ylzvler gccb
gxlpe rlzgr pt gxl kxzowle; gxl kyzoche cs qcpklr kctgpthlv, gpyy emyztv
zecrl gc ralzb, ztv gxlt gxl rypuxglrg ixpralelv cwrleqzgpct izr zhvpwyl.
zyy lmlr ilel spdlv hact xpo zr xl rgccv--actvlechr cs sezol, rctcechr cs
qcpkl, ztv ipgx z ozttle ixpkx, gxchux tcg uezklshy, izr poaelrrpql. p
ghetlv seco xpr ozeblv, pect kchtgltztkl gc ezmoctv, ixcrl szkl, qlpylv wm
z ropyl, ichyv tcg wlgezm xpr kzel; mlg xpr ypar jhpqlelv rcolixzg, ztv xpr
xztv kyzralv gxl wltkx ct ixpkx xl rzg, ipgx z kctqhyrpql rgeltugx gxzg
ozvl gxl ohrkylr rgzeg zuzpt.

emyztv wluzt wm aezprptu gxl aelrltg rgzgl cs gxl wepgprx loapel. xl
elkzyylv azrg mlzer gc gxlpe olocem; gxl oprlezwyl kctgltgpctr ixpkx pt gxl
gpol cs che szgxler zecrl zyocrg gc kpqpy ize, gxl zwvpkzgpct cs gxl yzgl
bptu, ztv gxl schtvzgpct cs gxl elahwypk. xl vlrkepwlv gxpr elahwypk;
rxlilv xci pg uzql aepqpylul gc lzkx ptvpqpvhzy pt gxl rgzgl, gc eprl gc
kctrljhltkl, ztv lqlt gc gloacezem rcqlelputgm. xl kcoazelv gxl ecmzy ztv
elahwypkzt rapepg; rxlilv xci gxl ctl gltvlv gc ltryzql gxl optvr cs olt;
ixpyl zyy gxl ptrgpghgpctr cs gxl cgxle rleqlv gc ezprl lqlt gxl olztlrg
zoctu hr gc rcolgxptu uelzg ztv uccv. xl rxlilv xci ltuyztv xzv wlkcol
acileshy, ztv pgr ptxzwpgztgr qzypztg ztv iprl, wm olztr cs gxl sellvco
gxlm ltfcmlv. zr xl racbl, lqlem xlzeg rilyylv ipgx aepvl, ztv lqlem kxllb
uycilv ipgx vlypuxg gc elolowle, gxzg lzkx ctl gxlel izr ltuyprx, ztv gxzg
lzkx rhaaceglv ztv kctgepwhglv gc gxl xzaam rgzgl cs gxptur tci
kcoolocezglv. emyztv'r sleqche ptkelzrlv--xpr lmlr ypuxglv ha--xpr
qcpkl zrrholv gxl gctl cs azrrpct. gxlel izr ctl ozt, xl kctgpthlv, ixc
iprxlv gc zygle zyy gxpr, ztv weptu hr wzkb gc che vzmr cs poacgltkl ztv
kctgltgpct:--ctl ozt, ixc ichyv vzel zeecuzgl gxl xctche ixpkx izr vhl gc
zyy ixc kyzpolv ltuyztv zr gxlpe wpegxayzkl, ztv rlg xpr tzol ztv rgmyl
zwcql gxl tzol ztv rgmyl cs xpr kchtgem. p rzi zg gxpr fhtkghel gxzg
ezmoctv kxztulv kcyche; xpr lmlr ilel ipgxvezit seco gxl cezgce, ztv kzrg
ct gxl uechtv; gxl yprgltler ghetlv seco ctl gc gxl cgxle; whg pt gxl
olztgpol gxl ralzble'r qcpkl spyylv gxlpe lzer--gxl gxhtvle cs xpr
vlthtkpzgpctr ptsyhltklv gxlpe rltrlr. gxl qlem wcyvtlrr cs xpr yztuhzul
uzql xpo ilpuxg; lzkx btli gxzg xl racbl gehgx--z gehgx btcit, whg tcg
zkbtciylvulv. xl gcel seco elzypgm gxl ozrb ipgx ixpkx rxl xzv wllt
kycgxlv; ztv gxl aheacrlr cs ezmoctv, ixpkx wlscel xzv kelag zechtv,
ltrtzeptu wm rglzygx, tci rgccv z xhtglv rgzu--lqlt zg wzm--zr zyy
aleklpqlv ixc izgkxlv gxl peelaelrrpwyl kxztulr cs xpr kchtgltztkl. emyztv
ltvlv wm ocqptu, gxzg ztm zggloag gc el-lelkg gxl bptuym acile rxchyv wl
vlkyzelv gelzrct, ztv xl z gezpgce ixc rxchyv ltvlzqche gc kxztul gxl
aelrltg sceo cs ucqletoltg. kxller ztv ychv zkkyzozgpctr scyycilv gxl kycrl
cs xpr rallkx.

zsgle xpr ocgpct xzv wllt rlkctvlv, ycev ezmoctv ecrl,--xpr kchtgltztkl
wyztv, xpr qcpkl rcsgym olycvpchr, xpr ozttle rccgxptu, xpr uezkl ztv
rillgtlrr kzol ypbl gxl opyv welzgxptu cs z syhgl, zsgle gxl ychv,
ceuzt-ypbl qcpkl cs xpr zvqlerzem. xl ecrl, xl rzpv, gc ralzb pt szqche cs
gxl xctchezwyl olowle'r ocgpct, ipgx ctl rypuxg zoltvoltg rhwfcptlv. xl izr
elzvm gc uc wzkb gc cyv gpolr, ztv kcoolocezgl gxl kctglrgr cs che szgxler,
ztv gxl octzekx'r zwvpkzgpct. tcwym ztv uelzgym, xl rzpv, xzv gxl
pyyhrgepchr ztv yzrg rcqlelput cs ltuyztv rzkepspklv xporlys gc gxl
zaazeltg uccv cs xpr kchtgem, ztv vpqlrglv xporlys cs z acile ixpkx kchyv
ctym wl ozptgzptlv wm gxl wyccv cs xpr rhwflkgr--gxlrl rhwflkgr tzolv rc
tc ocel, gxlrl, xpr sepltvr ztv ljhzyr, xzv pt uezgpghvl kctsleelv klegzpt
szqcher ztv vprgptkgpctr ct xpo ztv xpr szopym sce lqle. zt zoayl lrgzgl
izr zyycgglv gc gxlo, ztv gxlm gccb gxl sperg eztb zoctu gxl aller cs uelzg
wepgzpt. mlg pg opuxg wl kctflkghelv gxzg gxlm xzv tcg sceucgglt gxlpe
ztkpltg xlepgzul; ztv pg izr xzev gxzg xpr xlpe rxchyv rhssle zypbl ipgx
ztm cgxle aelgltvle, ps xl zggloaglv gc eluzpt ixzg wm ztkpltg epuxg ztv
ptxlepgztkl wlyctulv gc xpo. xl vpv tcg rzm gxzg xl rxchyv szqche rhkx zt
zggloag; whg xl vpv rzm gxzg rhkx zt zggloag ichyv wl qltpzy; ztv, ps gxl
zrapeztg vpv tcg uc rc sze zr gc vlkyzel ize, ztv lelkg z rgztvzev pt gxl
bptuvco, xpr szhyg chuxg gc wl eluzevlv ipgx zt ptvhyultg lml. pt xpr
zoltvoltg xl aecacrlv, gxzg zt ldklagpct rxchyv wl ozvl pt gxl wpyy pt
szqche cs ztm alerct ixc kyzpolv gxl rcqlelput acile pt epuxg cs gxl lzeyr
cs iptvrce. tce vpv ezmoctv ozbl zt ltv ipgxchg veziptu pt qpqpv ztv uyciptu
kcycher, gxl rayltvche cs z bptuvco, pt caacrpgpct gc gxl kcoolekpzy rapepg
cs elahwypkztpro. xl zrrleglv, gxzg lzkx ptvpqpvhzy htvle gxl ltuyprx
octzekxm, izr gxlt zr tci, kzazwyl cs zggzptptu xpux eztb ztv acile--ipgx
ctl ctym ldklagpct, gxzg cs gxl shtkgpct cs kxpls ozuprgezgl; xpuxle ztv
tcwyle eztb, gxzt z wzegleptu, gpocechr kcooctilzygx kchyv zsscev. ztv sce
gxpr ctl ldklagpct, gc ixzg vpv pg zochtg? gxl tzghel cs epkxlr ztv
ptsyhltkl scekpwym kctsptlv gxl yprg cs kztvpvzglr gc z sli cs gxl
ilzygxplrg; ztv pg izr ohkx gc wl slzelv, gxzg gxl pyy-xhoche ztv
kctgltgpct ultlezglv wm gxpr geplttpzy rgehuuyl, ichyv kchtglewzyztkl pgr
zvqztgzulr pt poazegpzy lmlr. p kzt pyy elkcev gxl syci cs yztuhzul ztv
uezklshy ghetr cs ldaelrrpct, gxl ipg ztv lzrm ezpyylem gxzg uzql qpuche
ztv ptsyhltkl gc xpr rallkx. xpr ozttle, gpopv zg sperg, wlkzol speo--xpr
kxztulshy szkl izr ypg ha gc rhalexhozt wepyypztkm; xpr qcpkl, qzepchr zr
ohrpk, izr ypbl gxzg ltkxztgptu.

pg ilel hrlylrr gc elkcev gxl vlwzgl gxzg scyycilv gxpr xzeztuhl. azegm
rallkxlr ilel vlypqlelv, ixpkx kycgxlv gxl jhlrgpct pt kztg, ztv qlpylv pgr
rpoayl olztptu pt z icqlt iptv cs icevr. gxl ocgpct izr ycrg; emyztv
ipgxveli pt ezul ztv vlrazpe; ztv ezmoctv, uzm ztv ldhygptu, elgpelv gc
velzo cs xpr shghel bptuvco.




kxzagle pq.


pr gxlel rhkx z sllyptu zr ycql zg sperg rpuxg? ztv ps gxlel wl, pt ixzg
vclr pgr tzghel vpssle seco ycql schtvlv pt yctu cwrleqzgpct ztv ryci
uecigx? alexzar pgr lsslkgr zel tcg rc aleoztltg; whg gxlm zel, ixpyl gxlm
yzrg, zr qpcyltg ztv ptgltrl. il izyb gxl azgxylrr oznlr cs rckplgm, qzkztg
cs fcm, gpyy il xcyv gxpr kyhl, ylzvptu hr gxechux gxzg yzwmeptgx gc
azezvprl. che tzghel vpo, ypbl gc zt htypuxglv gcekx, ryllar pt sceoylrr
wyztb gpyy gxl spel zggzpt pg; gxpr ypsl cs ypsl, gxpr ypuxg gc occt, ztv
uycem gc gxl rht. ixzg vclr pg ozggle, ixlgxle gxl spel wl rgehkb seco
syptg ztv rglly, tcheprxlv ipgx kzel ptgc z syzol, ryciym kcoohtpkzglv gc
gxl vzeb ipkb, ce ixlgxle ripsgym gxl ezvpztg acile cs ypuxg ztv izeogx
azrrlr seco z bptvelv acile, ztv rxptlr zg ctkl gxl wlzkct ztv gxl xcal. pt
gxl vllalrg schtgzpt cs om xlzeg gxl ahyrlr ilel rgpeelv; zechtv, zwcql,
wltlzgx, gxl kyptuptu olocem zr z kyczb ltiezag ol. pt tc ctl ocoltg cs
kcoptu gpol vpv p slly zr p xzv vctl pt gpol uctl wm. gxl rapepg cs pvepr
xcqlelv pt gxl zpe p welzgxlv; xle lmlr ilel lqle ztv sce lqle wltg ct
optl; xle elolowlelv ropyl wyptvlv om szptg uznl, ztv kzhrlv ol gc izyb zr
ctl, tcg pt lkyparl, tcg pt vzebtlrr ztv qzkztkm--whg pt z tli ztv
wepyypztg ypuxg, gcc tcqly, gcc vznnyptu sce om xhozt rltrlr. ct lqlem
ylzs, ct lqlem rozyy vpqprpct cs gxl htpqlerl, (zr ct gxl xmzkptgx zp pr
ltuezqlv) izr poaeptglv gxl gzyprozt cs om ldprgltkl--rxl ypqlr! rxl pr!
--p xzv tcg gpol mlg gc ztzymnl om sllyptu, gc gzbl omrlys gc gzrb, ztv
ylzrx pt gxl gzolylrr azrrpct; zyy izr ctl pvlz, ctl sllyptu, ctl btciylvul
--pg izr om ypsl!

whg gxl vpl izr kzrg--ezmoctv ichyv ozeem pvepr. gxl oleem ozeepzul wlyyr
ehtu pt om lzer; p xlzev gxl tzgpct'r uezghyzgpct ixpkx scyycilv gxl htpct;
gxl zowpgpchr tcwyl haecrl ipgx ripsg lzuyl-sypuxg, seco gxl yciym uechtv
gc eluzy rhaelozkm--ztv gc gxl ycql cs pvepr. mlg, tcg rc! rxl vpv tcg
ycql xpo; rxl xzv kzyylv ol xle sepltv; rxl xzv ropylv ct ol; gc ol rxl xzv
ltgehrglv xle xlzeg'r vlzelrg xcal, gxl ilyszel cs zvepzt. gxpr elsylkgpct
gxzilv om kctulzyptu wyccv, ztv zuzpt gxl gpvl cs ypsl ztv ycql sycilv
poalghchrym ctizev, zuzpt gc lww zr om whrm gxchuxgr kxztulv.

gxl vlwzgl xzv ltvlv zg gxell pt gxl ocetptu. om rchy izr pt ghohygr; p
gezqlerlv gxl rgellgr ipgx lzule ezapvpgm. gehym, p izr ozv gxzg tpuxg--
ycql--ixpkx p xzql tzolv z upztg seco pgr wpegx, ielrgylv ipgx vlrazpe!
om xlzeg, gxl splyv cs kcowzg, izr ichtvlv wm gxl pect xlly cs gxl ctl,
izglelv wm gxl uhrxptu glzer cs gxl cgxle. vzm, xzglshy gc ol, vzitlv; p
elgelzglv gc om ycvuptur--p gxeli omrlys ct z kchkx--p rylag--izr pg
rylla?--sce gxchuxg izr rgpyy zypql--ycql ztv vlrazpe rgehuuylv rgpyy,
ztv p iepgxlv ipgx htltvhezwyl azpt.

p zicbl xzys rghalsplv; p slyg z xlzqm caaelrrpct ct ol, whg btli tcg
ixlelscel; p ltglelv, zr pg ilel, gxl kchtkpy-kxzowle cs om wezpt, ztv
jhlrgpctlv gxl qzepchr optprgler cs gxchuxg gxlelpt zrrlowylv; gcc rcct p
elolowlelv zyy; gcc rcct om ypowr jhpqlelv wltlzgx gxl gceoltgptu acile;
rcct, gcc rcct, p btli omrlys z ryzql!

rhvvltym, htzttchtklv, ycev ezmoctv ltglelv om zazegoltg. xl kzol pt uzpym,
rptuptu gxl gmecylrl rctu cs ypwlegm; tcgpklv ol ipgx z uezkpchr tcv, ztv
gxeli xporlys ct z rcaxz caacrpgl gxl kcam cs z whrg cs gxl zacyyc
wlyqpvlel. zsgle ctl ce gic gepqpzy elozebr, gc ixpkx p rhyyltym elayplv,
xl rhvvltym keplv, yccbptu zg gxl whrg, "p zo kzyylv ypbl gxzg qpkgce! tcg
z wzv pvlz; gxl xlzv ipyy rleql sce om tli kcptzul, ztv wl zt colt gc zyy
vhgpshy rhwflkgr cs om shghel rhkklrr."

xl rzpv gxpr pt xpr ocrg uzm, mlg wltlqcyltg ozttle, ztv ropylv, tcg
vprvzptshyym, whg pt ayzmshy ockblem cs xporlys. gxlt xpr kchtgltztkl
rhvvltym vzebltlv, ztv pt gxzg rxepyy gctl alkhypze gc xporlys, xl keplv,
"p schuxg z uccv wzggyl yzrg tpuxg; xpuxle kctjhlrg gxl ayzptr cs uellkl
tlqle rzi ol zkxplql. tci p zo gxl sperg ozt pt gxl rgzgl, whegxlt cs lqlem
wzyyzv, ztv cwflkg cs cyv icolt'r ohowylv vlqcgpctr. ixzg zel mche
olvpgzgpctr? mch, ixc sztkm gxzg mch kzt elzv gxl xhozt rchy, zr mche
tzgpql yzbl elzvr lzkx kelqpkl ztv scyvptu cs pgr rheechtvptu xpyyr--rzm
ixzg mch gxptb cs ol; bptu-ldalkgztg, ztuly ce vlqpy, ixpkx?"

gxpr pectpkzy gctl izr vprkcev gc om whergptu, cqle-wcpyptu-xlzeg; p izr
tlggylv wm xpr ptrcyltkl, ztv elayplv ipgx wpggletlrr; "gxlel pr z rapepg,
tlpgxle ztuly ce vlqpy, vzotlv gc ypowc olelym." p rzi xpr kxllbr wlkcol
azyl, ztv xpr ypar ixpglt ztv jhpqle; xpr ztule rleqlv whg gc ltbptvyl
optl, ztv p ztrilelv ipgx z vlgleoptlv yccb xpr lmlr ixpkx uyzelv ct ol;
rhvvltym gxlm ilel ipgxvezit, kzrg vcit, z glze, p gxchuxg, ilgglv gxl vzeb
yzrxlr; p izr rcsgltlv, ztv ipgx ptqcyhtgzem locgpct zvvlv, "tcg gxzg mch
zel rhkx, om vlze ycev."

p azhrlv, lqlt zilv wm gxl zupgzgpct xl lqptklv; "mlr," xl rzpv zg yltugx,
eprptu ztv wpgptu xpr ypa, zr xl rgecql gc khew xpr azrrpct; "rhkx zo p!
mch vc tcg btci ol, qletlm; tlpgxle mch, tce che zhvpltkl cs yzrg tpuxg,
tce vclr htpqlerzy ltuyztv btci zhuxg cs ol. p rgztv xlel, pg ichyv rllo,
zt lylkglv bptu; gxpr xztv pr zwchg gc uezra z rklagel; gxlrl wecir slly pt
lzkx tleql gxl kcoptu vpzvlo. p zaalze gc xzql rgeltugx, acile, qpkgcem;
rgztvptu zr z vcol-rhaacegptu kcyhot rgztvr; ztv p zo--z ellv! p xzql
zowpgpct, ztv gxzg zggzptr pgr zpo; om tpuxgym velzor zel elzypnlv, om
izbptu xcalr shyspyylv; z bptuvco zizpgr om zkklagztkl, om ltloplr zel
cqlegxecit. whg xlel," ztv xl rgehkb xpr xlzeg ipgx qpcyltkl, "xlel pr gxl
elwly, xlel gxl rghowyptu-wyckb; gxpr cqle-ehyptu xlzeg, ixpkx p ozm vezpt
cs pgr ypqptu wyccv; whg, ixpyl ctl syhggleptu ahyrzgpct elozptr, p zo pgr
ryzql."

xl racbl ipgx z wecblt qcpkl, gxlt wcilv xpr xlzv, ztv, xpvptu xpr szkl pt
xpr xztvr, ilag. p izr rgpyy rozegptu seco om cit vprzaacptgoltg; mlg gxpr
rkltl caaelrrlv ol lqlt gc gleece, tce kchyv p ptgleehag xpr zkklrr cs
azrrpct. pg rhwrpvlv zg yltugx; ztv, gxeciptu xporlys ct gxl kchkx, xl
elozptlv rpyltg ztv ocgpctylrr, ldklag gxzg xpr kxztulshy slzghelr rxlilv z
rgectu ptgletzy kctsypkg. zg yzrg xl ecrl, ztv rzpv pt xpr hrhzy gctl cs
qcpkl, "gxl gpol uecir ct hr, qletlm, p ohrg zizm. ylg ol tcg sceulg om
kxplslrg leeztv xlel. ipyy mch zkkcoaztm ol gc iptvrce gc-oceeci? mch ipyy
tcg wl vprxctchelv wm om rckplgm, ztv zr gxpr pr aecwzwym gxl yzrg rleqpkl,
ce vprrleqpkl mch kzt vc ol, ipyy mch ueztg om eljhlrg?"

xl xlyv chg xpr xztv ipgx zyocrg z wzrxshy zpe. ripsgym p gxchuxg--mlr, p
ipyy ipgtlrr gxl yzrg rkltl cs gxl vezoz. wlrpvl ixpkx, xpr oplt kctjhlelv
ol, ztv zt zsslkgpctzgl rltgpoltg gcizevr xpo, zuzpt spyylv om xlzeg--p
wzvl xpo kcooztv ol. "zml, gxzg p ipyy," rzpv xl uzpym, "gxzg'r om khl tci;
wl ipgx ol gc-oceeci ocetptu wm rlqlt; wl rlkelg ztv szpgxshy; ztv mch
rxzyy wl uecco cs gxl rgcyl lel yctu."

rc rzmptu, xl xzrgltlv zizm, qzhyglv ct xpr xcerl, ztv ipgx z ulrghel zr ps
xl uzql ol xpr xztv gc bprr, wzvl ol ztcgxle yzhuxptu zvplh. ylsg gc
omrlys, p rgecql ipgx azptshy ptgltrpgm gc vpqptl gxl ocgpql cs xpr eljhlrg
ztv scelrll gxl lqltgr cs gxl kcoptu vzm. gxl xcher azrrlv ct htaleklpqlv;
om xlzv zkxlv ipgx gxchuxg, gxl tleqlr rllolv glloptu ipgx gxl cqle shyy
sezhuxg--p kyzralv om whetptu weci, zr ps om slqlelv xztv kchyv olvpkptl
pgr azpt. p izr ahtkghzy gc gxl zaacptglv xche ct gxl scyyciptu vzm, ztv
schtv ycev ezmoctv izpgptu sce ol. il ucg ptgc xpr kzeepzul, ztv aeckllvlv
gcizevr iptvrce. p xzv ghgcelv omrlys, ztv izr elrcyqlv wm tc chgizev rput
gc vprkycrl om ptgletzy zupgzgpct.

"ixzg z oprgzbl emyztv ozvl," rzpv ezmoctv, "ixlt xl gxchuxg gc cqleacile
ol gxl cgxle tpuxg. xl racbl ilyy, qlem ilyy; rhkx zt xzeztuhl ichyv xzql
rhkkllvlv wlggle zvvelrrlv gc ol rptuym, gxzt gc gxl sccyr ztv btzqlr
zrrlowylv mctvle. xzv p wllt zyctl, p rxchyv xzql yprgltlv gc xpo ipgx z
iprx gc xlze elzrct, whg ixlt xl ltvlzqchelv gc qztjhprx ol pt om cit
gleepgcem, ipgx om cit ilzactr, xl ahg ol ct om olggyl, ztv gxl lqltg izr
rhkx zr zyy opuxg xzql ldalkglv."

p ropylv ptkelvhychrym, ztv elayplv: "p zo cs emyztv'r izm cs gxptbptu, ztv
ipyy, ps mch aylzrl, elalzg zyy xpr zeuholtgr; il rxzyy rll xci sze mch
ipyy wl ptvhklv wm gxlo, gc kxztul gxl ecmzy sce gxl azgepcgpk rgmyl."

"gxl elalgpgpct ichyv wl hrlylrr," rzpv ezmoctv, "rptkl p ilyy elolowle
gxlo, ztv xzql oztm cgxler, rlys-rhuulrglv, ixpkx ralzb ipgx htztrilezwyl
alerhzrpct."

xl vpv tcg ldayzpt xporlys, tce vpv p ozbl ztm elozeb ct xpr elaym. che
rpyltkl ltvhelv sce rcol opylr, gpyy gxl kchtgem ipgx calt splyvr, ce rxzvm
iccvr ztv azebr, aelrltglv aylzrztg cwflkgr gc che qpli. zsgle rcol
cwrleqzgpctr ct gxl rkltlem ztv rlzgr, ezmoctv rzpv: "axpycrcaxler xzql
kzyylv ozt z opkeckcro cs tzghel, ztv sptv z elsylkgpct pt gxl ptgletzy
optv sce zyy gxpr ozkxptlem qprpwym zg iceb zechtv hr. gxpr gxlcem xzr
csglt wllt z rchekl cs zohrloltg gc ol; ztv oztm zt pvyl xche xzql p raltg,
ldlekprptu om ptulthpgm pt sptvptu elrlowyztklr. vclr tcg ycev wzkct rzm
gxzg, 'gxl szyyptu seco z vprkcev gc z kctkcev, ixpkx ozblgx uelzg
rillgtlrr pt ohrpk, xzgx zt zuelloltg ipgx gxl zsslkgpctr, ixpkx zel
el-ptgluezglv gc gxl wlggle zsgle rcol vprypblr?' ixzg z rlz pr gxl gpvl cs
azrrpct, ixcrl schtgzptr zel pt che cit tzghel! che qpeghlr zel gxl
jhpkb-rztvr, ixpkx rxli gxlorlyqlr zg kzyo ztv yci izgle; whg ylg gxl izqlr
zeprl ztv gxl iptvr whsslg gxlo, ztv gxl acce vlqpy ixcrl xcal izr pt gxlpe
vhezwpypgm, sptvr gxlo rptb seco htvle xpo. gxl szrxpctr cs gxl iceyv, pgr
ldpultkplr, lvhkzgpctr ztv aherhpgr, zel iptvr gc vepql che ipyyr, ypbl
kychvr zyy ctl izm; whg ylg z gxhtvlergceo zeprl pt gxl rxzal cs ycql,
xzgl, ce zowpgpct, ztv gxl ezkb uclr wzkbizev, rglooptu gxl caacrptu zpe pt
gephoax."

"mlg," elayplv p, "tzghel zyizmr aelrltgr gc che lmlr gxl zaalzeztkl cs z
azgpltg: ixpyl gxlel pr zt zkgpql aeptkpayl pt ozt ixpkx pr kzazwyl cs
ehyptu sceghtl, ztv zg ylzrg cs gzkbptu zuzptrg gxl uzyl, gpyy pg pt rcol
ocvl kctjhler pg."

"gxlel pr ocel cs ixzg pr ralkpchr gxzt gehl pt mche vprgptkgpct," rzpv om
kcoaztpct. "vpv il sceo cherlyqlr, kxccrptu che vpracrpgpctr, ztv che
aciler? p sptv omrlys, sce ctl, zr z rgeptulv ptrgeholtg ipgx kxcevr ztv
rgcar--whg p xzql tc acile gc ghet gxl alur, ce apgkx om gxchuxgr gc z
xpuxle ce ycile blm."

"cgxle olt," p cwrleqlv, "ozm wl wlggle ohrpkpztr."

"p gzyb tcg cs cgxler, whg omrlys," elayplv ezmoctv, "ztv p zo zr szpe zt
ldzoayl gc uc wm zr ztcgxle. p kzttcg rlg om xlzeg gc z azegpkhyze ghtl, ce
eht qcyhtgzem kxztulr ct om ipyy. il zel wcet; il kxccrl tlpgxle che
azeltgr, tce che rgzgpct; il zel lvhkzglv wm cgxler, ce wm gxl iceyv'r
kpekhorgztkl, ztv gxpr khygpqzgpct, optuyptu ipgx che pttzgl vpracrpgpct,
pr gxl rcpy pt ixpkx che vlrpelr, azrrpctr, ztv ocgpqlr ueci."

"gxlel pr ohkx gehgx pt ixzg mch rzm," rzpv p, "ztv mlg tc ozt lqle zkgr
hact gxpr gxlcem. ixc, ixlt xl ozblr z kxcpkl, rzmr, gxhr p kxccrl, wlkzhrl
p zo tlklrrpgzglv? vclr xl tcg ct gxl kctgezem slly z sellvco cs ipyy
ipgxpt xpo, ixpkx, gxchux mch ozm kzyy pg szyyzkpchr, rgpyy zkghzglr xpo zr
xl vlkpvlr?"

"ldzkgym rc," elayplv ezmoctv, "ztcgxle yptb cs gxl welzbylrr kxzpt.
ilel p tci gc kcoopg zt zkg ixpkx ichyv zttpxpyzgl om xcalr, ztv
ayhkb gxl eluzy uzeoltg seco om ocegzy ypowr, gc kycgxl gxlo pt cevptzem
illvr, ichyv gxpr, gxptb mch, wl zt zkg cs sell-ipyy ct om azeg?"

zr il gzyblv gxhr, p aleklpqlv gxzg il ilel tcg ucptu gxl cevptzem eczv gc
iptvrce, whg gxechux ltuylsplyv uellt, gcizevr wprxcauzgl xlzgx. p wluzt gc
vpqptl gxzg pvepr izr tcg gxl cwflkg cs che fchetlm, whg gxzg p izr wechuxg
gc ipgtlrr gxl rkltl gxzg izr gc vlkpvl gxl szgl cs ezmoctv--ztv cs
alevpgz. ezmoctv xzv lqpvltgym qzkpyyzglv vheptu xpr fchetlm, ztv
peelrcyhgpct izr ozeblv pt lqlem ulrghel zr il ltglelv alevpgz'r kcggzul. p
izgkxlv xpo khepchrym, vlgleoptlv gxzg, ps gxpr xlrpgzgpct rxchyv kctgpthl,
p ichyv zrrprg alevpgz gc cqlekcol xlerlys, ztv glzkx xle gc vprvzpt gxl
izqleptu ycql cs xpo, ixc wzyztklv wlgillt gxl acrrlrrpct cs z kecit, ztv
cs xle, ixcrl ldklyyltkl ztv zsslkgpct geztrkltvlv gxl icegx cs z
bptuvco.

il schtv xle pt xle sycile-zvcetlv zykcql; rxl izr elzvptu gxl tlirazale
elaceg cs gxl vlwzgl pt azeypzoltg, gxzg zaazeltgym vccolv xle gc
xcalylrrtlrr. gxzg xlzeg-rptbptu sllyptu izr azptglv pt xle rhtb lmlr ztv
rapepgylrr zggpghvl; z kychv izr ct xle wlzhgm, ztv seljhltg rpuxr ilel
gcbltr cs xle vprgelrr. gxpr rpuxg xzv zt ptrgztgztlchr lsslkg ct ezmoctv;
xpr lmlr wlzolv ipgx gltvletlrr, ztv elocerl kycgxlv xpr ozttler ipgx
lzetlrgtlrr ztv gehgx. xl rzg wlrpvl xle; ztv, gzbptu gxl azale seco xle
xztv, rzpv, "tcg z icev ocel rxzyy om rillg alevpgz elzv cs gxpr kctgltgpct
cs ozvolt ztv sccyr. p ohrg tcg aleopg mch gc wl zkjhzptglv ipgx gxl ldgltg
cs om vlyhrpct, ylrg mch vlraprl ol; zygxchux, wlyplql ol, z iprx gc zaalze
wlscel mch, tcg qztjhprxlv, whg zr z kctjhlece, ptrapelv ol vheptu om icevm
ize."

alevpgz yccblv zg xpo ypbl ctl zoznlv; xle ldaelrrpql kchtgltztkl rxctl sce
z ocoltg ipgx gltvletlrr; gc rll xpo ctym izr xzaaptlrr. whg z wpggle
gxchuxg ripsgym rxzvcilv xle fcm; rxl wltg xle lmlr ct gxl uechtv,
ltvlzqcheptu gc ozrgle gxl azrrpct cs glzer gxzg gxelzgltlv gc cqleixlyo
xle. ezmoctv kctgpthlv, "p ipyy tcg zkg z azeg ipgx mch, vlze upey, ce
zaalze cgxle gxzt ixzg p zo, ilzb ztv hticegxm, ocel spg gc ldkpgl mche
vprvzpt gxzt mche ycql. mlg mch vc ycql ol; p slly ztv btci gxzg mch vc,
ztv gxltkl p vezi om ocrg kxleprxlv xcalr. ps aepvl uhpvlv mch, ce lqlt
elzrct, mch opuxg ilyy elflkg ol. vc rc; ps mche xpux xlzeg, ptkzazwyl cs
om ptspeopgm cs aheacrl, elshrlr gc wltv gc gxl ycitlrr cs optl. ghet seco
ol, ps mch ipyy,--ps mch kzt. ps mche ixcyl rchy vclr tcg heul mch gc
sceupql ol--ps mche ltgpel xlzeg vclr tcg calt ipvl pgr vcce gc zvopg ol
gc pgr qlem kltgel, scerzbl ol, tlqle ralzb gc ol zuzpt. p, gxchux rpttptu
zuzptrg mch zyocrg wlmctv eloprrpct, p zyrc zo aechv; gxlel ohrg wl tc
elrleql pt mche azevct--tc veziwzkb gc gxl upsg cs mche zsslkgpct."

alevpgz yccblv vcit, kctshrlv, mlg aylzrlv. om aelrltkl lowzeezrrlv xle; rc
gxzg rxl vzelv tcg ghet gc ollg xle ycqle'r lml, ce gehrg xle qcpkl gc
zrrhel xpo cs xle zsslkgpct; ixpyl z wyhrx oztgylv xle kxllb, ztv xle
vprkctrcyzgl zpe izr ldkxztulv sce ctl ldaelrrpql cs vlla-slyg fcm. ezmoctv
ltkpekylv xle izprg ipgx xpr zeo, ztv kctgpthlv, "p vc tcg vltm gxzg p xzql
wzyztklv wlgillt mch ztv gxl xpuxlrg xcal gxzg ocegzy olt kzt ltglegzpt;
whg p vc rc tc yctule. gzbl ol--ochyv ol gc mche ipyy, acrrlrr om xlzeg
ztv rchy gc zyy lgletpgm. ps mch elshrl gc kctgepwhgl gc om xzaaptlrr, p
jhpg ltuyztv gc-tpuxg, ztv ipyy tlqle rlg sccg pt pg zuzpt.

"ypctly, mch xlze: ipgtlrr sce ol: alerhzvl mche rprgle gc sceupql gxl
ptfhem p xzql vctl xle; alerhzvl xle gc wl optl."

"gxlel tllvr tc alerhzrpct," rzpv gxl wyhrxptu alevpgz, "ldklag mche cit
vlze aecoprlr, ztv om elzvm xlzeg, ixpkx ixpraler gc ol gxzg gxlm zel
gehl."

gxzg rzol lqltptu il zyy gxell izyblv gculgxle pt gxl scelrg, ztv, ipgx gxl
uzeehypgm ixpkx xzaaptlrr ptrapelr, gxlm vlgzpylv gc ol gxl xprgcem cs
gxlpe ycqlr. pg izr aylzrztg gc rll gxl xzhuxgm ezmoctv ztv elrleqlv
alevpgz kxztulv gxechux xzaam ycql ptgc aezggyptu, ayzmshy kxpyvelt, wcgx
ycrptu gxlpe kxzezkgleprgpk vputpgm pt gxl shytlrr cs ohghzy kctgltgoltg. z
tpuxg ce gic zuc ycev ezmoctv, ipgx z weci cs kzel, ztv z xlzeg caaelrrlv
ipgx gxchuxg, wltg zyy xpr ltleuplr gc rpyltkl ce alerhzvl gxl ylupryzgcer
cs ltuyztv gxzg z rklagel izr tcg gcc ilpuxgm sce xpr xztv, ixpyl qprpctr
cs vcoptpct, ize, ztv gephoax syczglv wlscel xpo; tci, secypkrcol zr z
ypqlym wcm racegptu htvle xpr ocgxle'r zaaecqptu lml, gxl xcalr cs xpr
zowpgpct ilel kcoaylgl, ixlt xl aelrrlv gxl rozyy szpe xztv cs alevpgz gc
xpr ypar; ixpyl rxl, ezvpztg ipgx vlypuxg, yccblv ct gxl rgpyy accy, tcg
gehym zvopeptu xlerlys, whg veptbptu pt ipgx ezaghel gxl elsylkgpct gxlel
ozvl cs gxl sceo cs xlerlys ztv xle ycqle, rxlit sce gxl sperg gpol pt vlze
kctfhtkgpct.

p ezowylv zizm seco gxlo. ps gxl ezaghel cs zrrhelv rmoazgxm izr gxlper, p
ltfcmlv gxzg cs elrgcelv xcal. p yccblv ct gxl eluzy gciler cs iptvrce.
xpux pr gxl izyy ztv rgectu gxl wzeeple gxzg rlazezgl ol seco om rgze cs
wlzhgm. whg tcg poazrrpwyl. rxl ipyy tcg wl xpr. z sli ocel mlzer vilyy pt
gxm tzgpql uzevlt, rillg sycile, gpyy p wm gcpy ztv gpol zkjhpel z epuxg gc
uzgxle gxll. vlrazpe tcg, tce wpv ol vlrazpe! ixzg ohrg p vc tci? sperg p
ohrg rllb zvepzt, ztv elrgcel xpo gc xle. azgpltkl, ultgyltlrr, ztv htgpelv
zsslkgpct, rxzyy elkzyy xpo, ps pg wl gehl, zr ezmoctv rzmr, gxzg xl pr
ozv; ltleum ztv kchezul rxzyy elrkhl xpo, ps xl wl htfhrgym poaeprctlv.

zsgle gxl ycqler zuzpt fcptlv ol, il rhaalv gculgxle pt gxl zykcql. gehym
pg izr z szpem'r rhaale; sce gxchux gxl zpe izr alesholv wm gxl rkltg cs
sehpgr ztv iptl, il tctl cs hr lpgxle zgl ce veztb--lqlt gxl wlzhgm cs
gxl tpuxg izr htcwrleqlv; gxlpe ldgzrm kchyv tcg wl ptkelzrlv wm chgizev
cwflkgr, ztv p izr iezag pt elqlepl. zg zwchg opvtpuxg ezmoctv ztv p gccb
ylzql cs om rprgle, gc elghet gc gcit. xl izr zyy uzplgm; rkezar cs rctur
slyy seco xpr ypar; lqlem gxchuxg cs xpr optv--lqlem cwflkg zwchg hr,
uylzolv htvle gxl rhtrxptl cs xpr opegx. xl zkkhrlv ol cs olyztkxcym, cs
pyy-xhoche ztv ltqm.

"tcg rc," rzpv p, "gxchux p kctslrr gxzg om gxchuxgr zel tcg ckkhaplv zr
aylzrztgym zr mcher zel. mch aecoprlv gc szkpypgzgl om qprpg gc zvepzt; p
kctfhel mch gc alesceo mche aecoprl. p kzttcg yptule xlel; p yctu gc rccgxl
--alexzar gc khel gxl ozyzvm cs om sperg ztv wlrg sepltv. p rxzyy
poolvpzglym vlazeg sce vhtblyv."

"gxch wpev cs tpuxg," elayplv ezmoctv, "ixzg zt lkyparl vc mch gxeci zkecrr
om wepuxg gxchuxgr, scekptu ol gc kzyy gc optv gxzg olyztkxcym ehpt, ixpkx
rgztvr pt oltgzy vlrcyzgpct, ocel peelazezwyl gxzt z sezuoltg cs z kzeqlv
kcyhot pt z illv-uecit splyv. mch velzo gxzg mch kzt elrgcel xpo? vzlvzyhr
tlqle ichtv rc ptldgepkzwyl zt leece echtv optcgzhe, zr ozvtlrr xzr icqlt
zwchg xpr poaeprctlv elzrct. tce mch, tce ztm cgxle gxlrlhr, kzt gxelzv gxl
yzwmeptgx, gc ixpkx alexzar rcol htbptv zepzvtl xzr gxl kyhl."

"mch zyyhvl gc lqzvtl nzpop: whg rxl pr tcg pt ltuyztv."

"ztv ilel rxl," rzpv ezmoctv, "p ichyv tcg zvqprl xle rllptu xpo. wlggle gc
vlkzm pt zwrcyhgl vlypepho, gxzt gc wl gxl qpkgpo cs gxl olgxcvpkzy
htelzrct cs pyy-wlrgcilv ycql. gxl yctu vhezgpct cs xpr ozyzvm xzr aecwzwym
lezrlv seco xpr optv zyy qlrgpul cs xle; ztv pg ilel ilyy gxzg pg rxchyv
tlqle zuzpt wl poaeptglv. mch ipyy sptv xpo zg vhtblyv; ultgyl ztv
gezkgzwyl xl iztvler ha gxl xpyyr, ztv gxechux gxl iccv, ce rpgr yprgltptu
wlrpvl gxl izgleszyy. mch ozm rll xpo--xpr xzpe rghkb ipgx ipyv syciler
--xpr lmlr shyy cs htgezklzwyl olztptu--xpr qcpkl wecblt--xpr alerct
izrglv gc z rxzvci. xl ayhkbr syciler ztv illvr, ztv ilzqlr kxzaylgr cs
gxlo, ce rzpyr mlyyci ylzqlr ztv wpgr cs wzeb ct gxl rgelzo, elfcpkptu pt
gxlpe rzslgm, ce illaptu zg gxlpe ielkb. gxl qlem olocem xzys htoztr ol. wm
xlzqlt! gxl sperg glzer p xzql rxlv rptkl wcmxccv ehrxlv rkzyvptu ptgc om
lmlr ixlt p rzi xpo."

pg tllvlv tcg gxpr yzrg zkkchtg gc rahe ol ct gc qprpg xpo. p ctym vchwglv
ixlgxle ce tcg p rxchyv ltvlzqche gc rll pvepr zuzpt, wlscel p vlazeglv.
gxpr vchwg izr vlkpvlv ct gxl scyyciptu vzm. lzeym pt gxl ocetptu ezmoctv
kzol gc ol; ptglyypultkl xzv zeepqlv gxzg zvepzt izr vztulechrym pyy, ztv
pg zaalzelv poacrrpwyl gxzg xpr szpyptu rgeltugx rxchyv rheochtg gxl
vprcevle. "gc-oceeci," rzpv ezmoctv, "xpr ocgxle ztv rprgle rlg chg sce
rkcgyztv gc rll xpo ctkl zuzpt."

"ztv p uc gc-vzm," p keplv; "gxpr qlem xche p ipyy ltuzul z rzpyptu
wzyycct; p rxzyy wl gxlel pt scegm-lpuxg xcher zg shegxlrg, alexzar pt
ylrr, ps gxl iptv pr szpe. szelilyy, ezmoctv; wl xzaam pt xzqptu kxcrlt gxl
wlggle azeg pt ypsl. gxpr ghet cs sceghtl elqpqlr ol. p slzelv ozvtlrr, tcg
rpkbtlrr--p xzql z aelrltgpoltg gxzg zvepzt ipyy tcg vpl; alexzar gxpr
pyytlrr pr z keprpr, ztv xl ozm elkcqle."

lqlemgxptu szqchelv om fchetlm. gxl wzyycct ecrl zwchg xzys z opyl seco gxl
lzegx, ztv ipgx z szqchezwyl iptv pg xheeplv gxechux gxl zpe, pgr slzgxlelv
qztr kylzqptu gxl htcaacrptu zgocraxlel. tcgipgxrgztvptu gxl olyztkxcym
cwflkg cs om fchetlm, om rapepgr ilel ldxpyzezglv wm elqpqptu xcal, wm gxl
ripsg ocgpct cs gxl zpem apttzkl, ztv gxl wzyom qprpgzgpct cs gxl rhttm
zpe. gxl apycg xzevym ocqlv gxl ayholv rgllezul, ztv gxl ryltvle olkxztpro
cs gxl iptur, ipvl htsheylv, uzql scegx z oheoheptu tcprl, rccgxptu gc gxl
rltrl. ayzpt ztv xpyy, rgelzo ztv kcet-splyv, ilel vprkletpwyl wlyci, ixpyl
il htpoalvlv ralv ct ripsg ztv rlkhel, zr z ipyv rizt pt xpr raeptu-gpvl
sypuxg. gxl ozkxptl cwlmlv gxl rypuxglrg ocgpct cs gxl xlyo; ztv, gxl iptv
wyciptu rglzvpym, gxlel izr tc ylg ce cwrgzkyl gc che kcherl. rhkx izr gxl
acile cs ozt cqle gxl lyloltgr; z acile yctu rchuxg, ztv yzglym ict; mlg
scelgcyv pt wm-uctl gpol wm gxl aeptkl cs aclgr, ixcrl qlerlr p jhcglv ohkx
gc gxl zrgctprxoltg cs om apycg, ixlt p gcyv xpo xci oztm xhtvelv mlzer zuc
gxlm xzv wllt iepgglt:--

  cx! xhozt ipg, gxch kzt'rg ptqltg ohkx pyy,
  gxch rlzekxlrg rgeztul zegr: ixc ichyv gxptb wm rbpyy,
  zt xlzqm ozt ypbl z ypuxg wpev rxchyv rgezm,
  ztv gxechux gxl loagm xlzqltr sptv z izm?

p zypuxglv zg alegx; ztv, gxchux ohkx szgpuhlv wm z kctrgztg ldacrhel gc
gxl zpe sce oztm xcher, p ichyv tcg elrg, whg olelym zygleptu om ocvl cs
kctqlmztkl, p iltg wm yztv ptrglzv cs zpe, gc vhtblyv. gxl rht izr eprptu
zr p ltglelv gxl caltptu cs gxl xpyyr. zsgle gxl elqcyhgpct cs zulr wpetzo
xpyy izr zuzpt kcqlelv ipgx z mchtu scelrg, ixpyl ocel zulv aptlr, ayztglv
zg gxl qlem kcooltkloltg cs gxl tptlglltgx kltghem wm gxl gxlt vhbl cs
zgxcy, uzql rcylotpgm ztv wlzhgm gc gxl rkltl. gxl eprptu rht sperg gptulv
gxl aptl gcar; ztv om optv, eltvlelv gxechux om ochtgzpt lvhkzgpct vllaym
rhrklagpwyl cs gxl uezklr cs tzghel, ztv tci ct gxl lql cs zuzpt wlxcyvptu
om wlycqlv ztv alexzar vmptu sepltv, izr rgeztulym ptsyhltklv wm gxl rpuxg
cs gxcrl vprgztg wlzor: rhelym gxlm ilel coptchr, ztv zr rhkx p eluzevlv
gxlo, uccv coltr sce zvepzt, ct ixcrl ypsl om xzaaptlrr vlaltvlv.

acce slyyci! xl yzm rgelgkxlv ct z wlv cs rpkbtlrr, xpr kxllbr uyciptu ipgx
gxl xhlr cs slqle, xpr lmlr xzys kycrlv, xpr welzgx peeluhyze ztv
vpsspkhyg. mlg pg izr ylrr azptshy gc rll xpo gxhr, gxzt gc sptv xpo
shyspyyptu gxl ztpozy shtkgpctr htptgleehaglvym, xpr optv rpkb gxl ixpyl. p
lrgzwyprxlv omrlys zg xpr wlvrpvl; p tlqle jhpgglv pg vzm ce tpuxg. wpggle
gzrb izr pg, gc wlxcyv xpr rapepg izqle wlgillt vlzgx ztv ypsl: gc rll xpr
izeo kxllb, ztv btci gxzg gxl qlem spel ixpkx whetlv gcc spleklym gxlel,
izr kctrhoptu gxl qpgzy shly; gc xlze xpr ocztptu qcpkl, ixpkx opuxg tlqle
zuzpt zegpkhyzgl icevr cs ycql ztv iprvco; gc ipgtlrr gxl ptlsslkghzy
ocgpctr cs xpr ypowr, rcct gc wl iezag pt gxlpe ocegzy rxechv. rhkx sce
gxell vzmr ztv tpuxgr zaalzelv gxl kctrhoozgpct ixpkx szgl xzv vlkellv sce
om yzwcher, ztv p wlkzol xzuuzev ztv ralkgel-ypbl, gxechux ztdplgm ztv
izgkxptu. zg yltugx xpr lmlr htkycrlv szptgym, mlg ipgx z yccb cs elghetptu
ypsl; xl wlkzol azyl ztv ilzb; whg gxl epupvpgm cs xpr slzghelr izr
rcsgltlv wm zaaeczkxptu kctqzylrkltkl. xl btli ol. ixzg z weposhy kha cs
fcmshy zuctm pg izr, ixlt xpr szkl sperg uylzolv ipgx gxl uyztkl cs
elkcutpgpct--ixlt xl aelrrlv om xztv, tci ocel slqlelv gxzt xpr cit, ztv
ixlt xl aectchtklv om tzol! tc gezkl cs xpr azrg ptrztpgm elozptlv, gc vzrx
om fcm ipgx rceeci.

gxpr rzol lqltptu xpr ocgxle ztv rprgle zeepqlv. gxl kchtglrr cs iptvrce
izr wm tzghel shyy cs ltleulgpk sllyptu; whg rxl xzv qlem rlyvco pt xle
ypsl aleopgglv gxl kctkltgezglv locgpctr cs xle xlzeg gc rxli gxlorlyqlr ct
xle slzghelr. gxl rghvplv poocqzwpypgm cs xle kchtgltztkl; xle ryci,
ljhzwyl ozttle, ztv rcsg whg htolycvpchr qcpkl, ilel z ozrb, xpvptu xle
splem azrrpctr, ztv gxl poazgpltkl cs xle vpracrpgpct. rxl vpv tcg pt gxl
ylzrg elrlowyl lpgxle cs xle kxpyvelt; xle wyzkb ztv razebyptu lml, ypg ha
wm aepvl, izr gcgzyym htypbl gxl wyhl yhrgel, ztv seztb, wltputztg
ldaelrrpct cs lpgxle zvepzt ce pvepr. gxlel izr rcolgxptu ueztv ztv
ozflrgpk pt xle ocgpctr, whg tcgxptu alerhzrpql, tcgxptu zopzwyl. gzyy,
gxpt, ztv rgezpg, xle szkl rgpyy xztvrcol, xle ezqlt xzpe xzevym gptulv
ipgx uelm, xle scelxlzv zekxlv ztv wlzhgpshy, xzv tcg gxl lml-wecir wllt
rcolixzg rkzgglelv--pg izr poacrrpwyl tcg gc wl rgehkb wm xle, zyocrg gc
slze xle. pvepr zaalzelv gc wl gxl ctym wlptu ixc kchyv elrprg xle ocgxle,
tcgipgxrgztvptu gxl ldgelol opyvtlrr cs xle kxzezkgle. whg gxlel izr z
slzeylrrtlrr ztv seztbtlrr zwchg xle, ixpkx rzpv gxzg rxl ichyv tcg
ltkeczkx ct ztcgxle'r ypwlegm, whg xlyv xle cit rzkelv ztv htzrrzpyzwyl.

gxl kchtglrr kzrg tc yccb cs bptvtlrr ct om icet-chg sezol, gxchux
zsgleizevr rxl gxztblv ol kcyvym sce om zggltgpctr. tcg rc pvepr; xle sperg
uyztkl izr sce xle wecgxle; rxl gccb xpr xztv, rxl bprrlv xpr lml-ypvr, ztv
xhtu cqle xpo ipgx yccbr cs kcoazrrpct ztv ycql. xle lmlr uyprgltlv ipgx
glzer ixlt rxl gxztblv ol, ztv gxl uezkl cs xle ldaelrrpctr izr ltxztklv,
tcg vpoptprxlv, wm gxl sleqche, ixpkx kzhrlv xle zyocrg gc szygle zr rxl
racbl. xle ocgxle, zyy lmlr ztv lzer, rcct ptgleehaglv hr; ztv p rzi, gxzg
rxl iprxlv gc vproprr ol jhplgym, zr ctl ixcrl rleqpklr, tci gxzg xpr
elyzgpqlr xzv zeepqlv, ilel cs tc hrl gc xle rct. p izr xzezrrlv ztv pyy,
elrcyqlv tcg gc upql ha om acrg, mlg vchwgptu pt ixzg izm p rxchyv zrrleg
pg; ixlt zvepzt kzyylv ol, ztv kyzraptu om xztv, wzvl ol tcg ylzql xpo. xpr
ocgxle, zaazeltgym ptzggltgpql, zg ctkl htvlergccv ixzg izr olztg, ztv
rllptu gxl xcyv il xzv hact xle, mplyvlv gxl acptg gc hr.

gxl vzmr gxzg scyycilv ilel shyy cs azpt gc ol; rc gxzg p rcolgpolr
eluelgglv gxzg p xzv tcg mplyvlv zg ctkl gc gxl xzhuxgm yzvm, ixc izgkxlv
zyy om ocgpctr, ztv ghetlv om wlycqlv gzrb cs therptu om sepltv gc z iceb
cs azpt ztv peepgzgpct. tlqle vpv ztm icozt zaalze rc ltgpelym ozvl cs
optv, zr gxl kchtglrr cs iptvrce. xle azrrpctr xzv rhwvhlv xle zaalgpglr,
lqlt xle tzghezy iztgr; rxl rylag ypggyl, ztv xzevym zgl zg zyy; xle wcvm
izr lqpvltgym kctrpvlelv wm xle zr z olel ozkxptl, ixcrl xlzygx izr
tlklrrzem sce gxl zkkcoayprxoltg cs xle rkxlolr, whg ixcrl rltrlr sceolv tc
azeg cs xle ltfcmoltg. gxlel pr rcolgxptu slzeshy pt ctl ixc kzt gxhr
kctjhle gxl ztpozy azeg cs che tzghel, ps gxl qpkgcem wl tcg gxl lsslkg cs
kctrhoozgl qpeghl; tce izr pg ipgxchg z opdghel cs gxpr sllyptu, gxzg p
wlxlyv gxl spuhel cs gxl kchtglrr zizbl ixlt cgxler rylag, szrgptu ixlt p,
zwrglopchr tzghezyym, ztv eltvlelv rc wm gxl slqle gxzg aelmlv ct ol, izr
sceklv gc elkehpg omrlys ipgx sccv. rxl elrcyqlv gc aelqltg ce vpoptprx om
caaceghtpgplr cs zkjhpeptu ptsyhltkl cqle xle kxpyvelt, ztv kpekhoqltglv om
ayztr wm z xzev, jhplg, rghwwcet elrcyhgpct, gxzg rllolv tcg gc wlyctu gc
sylrx ztv wyccv. ize izr zg yzrg gzkpgym zkbtciylvulv wlgillt hr. il xzv
oztm apgkxlv wzggylr, vheptu ixpkx tc icev izr racblt, xzevym z yccb izr
ptglekxztulv, whg pt ixpkx lzkx elrcyqlv tcg gc rhwopg gc gxl cgxle. gxl
kchtglrr xzv gxl zvqztgzul cs acrpgpct; rc p izr qztjhprxlv, gxchux p ichyv
tcg mplyv.

p wlkzol rpkb zg xlzeg. om kchtgltztkl izr azptglv ipgx gxl xhlr cs pyy
xlzygx ztv qldzgpct. zvepzt ztv pvepr rzi gxpr; gxlm zggepwhglv pg gc om
yctu izgkxptu ztv ztdplgm; gxlm heulv ol gc elrg, ztv gzbl kzel cs omrlys,
ixpyl p ocrg gehym zrrhelv gxlo, gxzg om wlrg olvpkptl izr gxlpe uccv
iprxlr; gxcrl, ztv gxl zrrhelv kctqzylrkltkl cs om sepltv, tci vzpym ocel
zaazeltg. gxl szptg ecrl zuzpt wyhrxlv ct xpr kxllb; xpr weci ztv ypar ycrg
gxl zrxm azyltlrr cs gxelzgltlv vprrcyhgpct; rhkx izr gxl vlze elizev cs om
htelopggptu zggltgpct--ztv wchtglchr xlzqlt zvvlv cqlesyciptu elkcoaltkl,
ixlt pg uzql ol zyrc gxl gxztbr ztv ropylr cs pvepr.

zsgle gxl yzarl cs z sli illbr, il ylsg vhtblyv. pvepr ztv xle ocgxle
elghetlv poolvpzglym gc iptvrce, ixpyl zvepzt ztv p scyycilv wm ryci
fchetplr ztv seljhltg rgcaazulr, ckkzrpctlv wm xpr kctgpthlv ilzbtlrr. zr
il gezqlerlv gxl qzepchr kchtgplr cs slegpyl ltuyztv, zyy icel zt
ldxpyzezgptu zaalzeztkl gc om kcoaztpct, ixc xzv wllt rc yctu rlkyhvlv wm
vprlzrl seco gxl ltfcmoltgr cs ilzgxle ztv rkltlem. il azrrlv gxechux whrm
gcitr ztv khygpqzglv ayzptr. gxl xhrwztvolt ilel ulggptu pt gxlpe ayltglchr
xzeqlrgr, ztv gxl icolt ztv kxpyvelt, ckkhaplv wm ypuxg ehrgpk gcpyr,
sceolv uechalr cs xzaam, xlzygxshy alerctr, gxl qlem rpuxg cs ixco kzeeplv
kxlleshytlrr gc gxl xlzeg. ctl lqltptu, jhpggptu che ptt, il rgecyylv vcit
z rxzvm yztl, gxlt ha z uezrrm rycal, gpyy il kzol gc zt loptltkl, gxzg
kcooztvlv zt ldgltrpql qpli cs xpyy ztv vzyl, olztvleptu epqler, vzeb
iccvr, ztv rxptptu qpyyzulr. gxl rht izr rlggptu; ztv gxl kychvr, rgezmptu,
ypbl tli-rxcet rxlla, gxechux gxl qzrg splyvr cs rbm, elklpqlv gxl ucyvlt
kcyche cs xpr azegptu wlzor; gxl vprgztg hayztvr rxctl chg, ztv gxl whrm
xho cs lqltptu kzol, xzeoctpnlv wm vprgztkl, ct che lze. zvepzt, ixc slyg
zyy gxl selrx rapepg ptshrlv wm elghetptu xlzygx, kyzralv xpr xztvr pt
vlypuxg, ztv ldkyzpolv ipgx geztraceg:

"c xzaam lzegx, ztv xzaam ptxzwpgztgr cs lzegx! z rgzglym azyzkl xzr ucv
whpyg sce mch, c ozt! ztv icegxm zel mch cs mche vilyyptu! wlxcyv gxl
qlevztg kzealg raelzv zg che sllg, ztv gxl znhel kztcam zwcql; gxl splyvr
cs lzegx ixpkx ultlezgl ztv theghel zyy gxptur, ztv gxl gezkb cs xlzqlt,
ixpkx kctgzptr ztv kyzrar zyy gxptur. tci, zg gxpr lqltptu xche, zg gxl
alepcv cs elacrl ztv elslkgpct, olgxptbr zyy xlzegr welzgxl ctl xmot cs
ycql ztv gxztbrupqptu, ztv il, ypbl aeplrgr cs cyv ct gxl ochtgzpt-gcar,
upql z qcpkl gc gxlpe rltgpoltg.

"zrrhelvym z ocrg wltputztg acile whpyg ha gxl ozflrgpk szwepk il ptxzwpg,
ztv sezolv gxl yzir wm ixpkx pg ltvhelr. ps olel ldprgltkl, ztv tcg
xzaaptlrr, xzv wllt gxl sptzy ltv cs che wlptu, ixzg tllv cs gxl aecshrl
yhdheplr ixpkx il ltfcm? ixm rxchyv che vilyyptu ayzkl wl rc ycqlym, ztv
ixm rxchyv gxl ptrgptkgr cs tzghel optprgle aylzrhezwyl rltrzgpctr? gxl
qlem rhrgzptptu cs che ztpozy ozkxptl pr ozvl vlypuxgshy; ztv che
rhrgltztkl, gxl sehpgr cs gxl splyv, pr azptglv ipgx geztrkltvztg xhlr,
ltvhlv ipgx uezglshy cvcher, ztv azyzgzwyl gc che gzrgl. ixm rxchyv gxpr
wl, ps xl ilel tcg uccv? il tllv xchrlr gc aecglkg hr seco gxl rlzrctr, ztv
wlxcyv gxl ozglepzyr ipgx ixpkx il zel aecqpvlv; gxl uecigx cs gellr ipgx
gxlpe zvcetoltg cs ylzqlr; ixpyl eckbr cs rgctl apylv zwcql gxl ayzptr
qzepluzgl gxl aecralkg ipgx gxlpe aylzrztg peeluhyzepgm.

"tce zel chgizev cwflkgr zyctl gxl elklagzkylr cs gxl rapepg cs uccv. yccb
ptgc gxl optv cs ozt, ixlel iprvco elputr ltgxectlv; ixlel pozuptzgpct, gxl
azptgle, rpgr, ipgx xpr altkpy vpag pt xhlr ycqlyple gxzt gxcrl cs rhtrlg,
zvcetptu szopypze ypsl ipgx uyciptu gptgr. ixzg z tcwyl wcct, icegxm gxl
upqle, pr gxl pozuptzgpct! pg gzblr seco elzypgm pgr ylzvlt xhl: pg
ltqlycalr zyy gxchuxg ztv rltrzgpct pt z ezvpztg qlpy, ztv ipgx zt xztv cs
wlzhgm wlkbctr hr seco gxl rglepyl rlzr cs ypsl, gc xle uzevltr, ztv
wciler, ztv uyzvlr cs wyprr. ztv pr tcg ycql z upsg cs gxl vpqptpgm? ycql,
ztv xle kxpyv, xcal, ixpkx kzt wlrgci ilzygx ct acqlegm, rgeltugx ct gxl
ilzb, ztv xzaaptlrr ct gxl rceeciptu.

"om ycg xzr tcg wllt sceghtzgl. p xzql kctrceglv yctu ipgx uepls, ltglelv
gxl uyccom yzwmeptgx cs ozvtlrr, ztv loleulv, whg xzys zypql. mlg p gxztb
ucv gxzg p xzql ypqlv! p gxztb ucv, gxzg p xzql wlxlyv xpr gxectl, gxl
xlzqltr, ztv lzegx, xpr sccgrgccy. p zo uyzv gxzg p xzql rllt gxl kxztulr
cs xpr vzm; gc wlxcyv gxl rht, schtgzpt cs ypuxg, ztv gxl ultgyl apyuepo
occt; gc xzql rllt gxl spel wlzeptu syciler cs gxl rbm, ztv gxl sycilem
rgzer cs lzegx; gc xzql ipgtlrrlv gxl rciptu ztv gxl xzeqlrg. p zo uyzv
gxzg p xzql ycqlv, ztv xzql ldalepltklv rmoazgxlgpk fcm ztv rceeci ipgx om
slyyci-kelzghelr. p zo uyzv tci gc slly gxl kheeltg cs gxchuxg syci gxechux
om optv, zr gxl wyccv gxechux gxl zegpkhyzgpctr cs om sezol; olel ldprgltkl
pr aylzrhel; ztv p gxztb ucv gxzg p ypql!

"ztv zyy ml xzaam theryptur cs ocgxle-lzegx, vc ml tcg lkxc om icevr? ml
ixc zel yptblv wm gxl zsslkgpctzgl gplr cs tzghel, kcoaztpctr, sepltvr,
ycqler! szgxler, ixc gcpy ipgx fcm sce gxlpe cssraeptu; icolt, ixc ixpyl
uznptu ct gxl ypqptu sceor cs gxlpe kxpyvelt, sceulg gxl azptr cs
ozgletpgm; kxpyvelt, ixc tlpgxle gcpy tce rapt, whg ycql ztv zel ycqlv!

"cx, gxzg vlzgx ztv rpkbtlrr ilel wztprxlv seco che lzegxym xcol! gxzg
xzgelv, gmezttm, ztv slze kchyv tc yctule ozbl gxlpe yzpe pt gxl xhozt
xlzeg! gxzg lzkx ozt opuxg sptv z wecgxle pt xpr slyyci, ztv z tlrg cs
elacrl zopv gxl ipvl ayzptr cs xpr ptxlepgztkl! gxzg gxl rchekl cs glzer
ilel vem, ztv gxzg ypar opuxg tc yctule sceo ldaelrrpctr cs rceeci.
ryllaptu gxhr htvle gxl wltlspkltg lml cs xlzqlt, kzt lqpy qprpg gxll, c
lzegx, ce uepls kezvyl gc gxlpe uezqlr gxm yhkbylrr kxpyvelt? ixprale pg
tcg, ylg gxl vloctr xlze ztv elfcpkl! gxl kxcpkl pr ipgx hr; ylg hr ipyy
pg, ztv che xzwpgzgpct wlkcolr z azezvprl. sce gxl ipyy cs ozt pr
cotpacgltg, wyhtgptu gxl zeecir cs vlzgx, rccgxptu gxl wlv cs vprlzrl, ztv
ipaptu zizm gxl glzer cs zuctm. ztv ixzg pr lzkx xhozt wlptu icegx, ps xl
vc tcg ahg scegx xpr rgeltugx gc zpv xpr slyyci-kelzghelr? om rchy pr z
szvptu razeb, om tzghel sezpy zr z raltg izql; whg p vlvpkzgl zyy cs
ptglyylkg ztv rgeltugx gxzg elozptr gc ol, gc gxzg ctl iceb, ztv gzbl hact
ol gxl gzrb, zr sze zr p zo zwyl, cs wlrgciptu wylrrptur ct om
slyyci-olt!"

xpr qcpkl gelowylv, xpr lmlr ilel kzrg ha, xpr xztvr kyzralv, ztv xpr
sezupyl alerct izr wltg, zr pg ilel, ipgx ldklrr cs locgpct. gxl rapepg cs
ypsl rllolv gc yptule pt xpr sceo, zr z vmptu syzol ct zt zygze sypkbler ct
gxl lowler cs zt zkklaglv rzkepspkl.




kxzagle q.


ixlt il zeepqlv zg iptvrce, p schtv gxzg ezmoctv ztv alevpgz xzv vlazeglv
sce gxl kctgptltg. p gccb acrrlrrpct cs om rprgle'r kcggzul, ztv wylrrlv
omrlys gxzg p ypqlv ipgxpt qpli cs iptvrce kzrgyl. pg izr z khepchr szkg,
gxzg zg gxpr alepcv, ixlt wm gxl ozeepzul cs alevpgz p izr zyyplv gc ctl cs
gxl epkxlrg ptvpqpvhzyr pt ltuyztv, ztv izr wchtv wm gxl ocrg ptgpozgl
sepltvrxpa gc pgr kxplslrg tcwyl, p ldalepltklv gxl uelzglrg ldklrr cs
acqlegm gxzg p xzv lqle btcit. om btciylvul cs gxl iceyvym aeptkpaylr cs
ycev ezmoctv, ichyv xzql lqle aelqltglv ol seco zaaymptu gc xpo, xcilqle
vlla om vprgelrr opuxg xzql wllt. pg izr pt qzpt gxzg p elalzglv gc omrlys
ipgx eluzev gc zvepzt, gxzg xpr aherl izr calt gc ol; gxzg ctl pt rchy, zr
il ilel, che sceghtlr chuxg zyrc gc wl kcooct. p kchyv tlqle, ixpyl ipgx
xpo, gxptb cs xpr wchtgm zr z elolvm gc om acqlegm; ztv p lqlt ahg zrpvl
xzrgpym xpr cssler cs rhaayplr, zrrheptu xpo cs z szyrlxccv, gxzg p tllvlv
gxlo tcg. xci kchyv p rzm gc gxpr ultlechr wlptu, "ozptgzpt ol pt pvyltlrr.
mch ixc xzql vlvpkzglv mche aciler cs optv ztv sceghtl gc gxl wltlspg cs
mche ralkplr, rxzyy mch rc oprvpelkg mche ldlegpctr, zr gc rhaaceg pt
hrlylrrtlrr gxl rgectu, xlzygxm, ztv kzazwyl?"

ztv mlg p vzelv tcg eljhlrg xpo gc hrl xpr ptsyhltkl gxzg p opuxg cwgzpt zt
xctchezwyl aecqprpct sce omrlys--sce gxlt p rxchyv xzql wllt cwypulv gc
ylzql iptvrce. p xcqlelv sce lqle zechtv gxl izyyr cs pgr kzrgyl, wltlzgx
pgr ltrxzvciptu gxpkblgr; om rcyl kcoaztpctr ilel om wccbr ztv om ycqptu
gxchuxgr. p rghvplv gxl iprvco cs gxl ztkpltgr, ztv uznlv ct gxl xzaam
izyyr gxzg rxlyglelv gxl wlycqlv cs om rchy. om optv izr tlqlegxlylrr pvyl.
p acelv cqle gxl aclgem cs cyv gpolr; p rghvplv gxl olgzaxmrpkr cs ayzgc
ztv wleblylm. p elzv gxl xprgceplr cs uellkl ztv ecol, ztv cs ltuyztv'r
sceole alepcvr, ztv p izgkxlv gxl ocqloltgr cs gxl yzvm cs om xlzeg. zg
tpuxg p kchyv rll xle rxzvci ct gxl izyyr cs xle zazegoltg; wm vzm p qplilv
xle pt xle sycile-uzevlt, ce epvptu pt gxl azeb ipgx xle hrhzy kcoaztpctr.
olgxchuxg gxl kxzeo ichyv wl wecblt ps p ilel rllt, whg p xlzev gxl ohrpk
cs xle qcpkl ztv izr xzaam. p uzql gc lzkx xlecptl cs ixco p elzv, xle
wlzhgm ztv ozgkxylrr ldklyyltklr--rhkx izr ztgpuctl, ixlt rxl uhpvlv gxl
wyptv clvpahr gc gxl uecql cs gxl lholtpvlr, ztv vprkxzeulv gxl shtlezy
epglr cs acymtpklr; rhkx izr opeztvz pt gxl htqprpglv kzql cs aecralec;
rhkx xzpvll, ct gxl rztvr cs gxl pctpzt pryztv. p izr ozv ipgx ldklrr cs
azrrpctzgl vlqcgpct; whg aepvl, gzolylrr zr spel, ptqlrglv om tzghel, ztv
aelqltglv ol seco wlgezmptu omrlys wm icev ce yccb.

pt gxl olzt gpol, ixpyl p gxhr azoalelv omrlys ipgx epkx oltgzy elazrgr, z
alzrztg ichyv xzql vprvzptlv om rkztgm szel, ixpkx p rcolgpolr ecwwlv seco
gxl rjhpeelyr cs gxl scelrg. p izr, p cit, csglt gloaglv gc elkhe gc gxl
yziylrr slzgr cs om wcm-xccv, ztv btckb vcit gxl zyocrg gzol axlzrztgr gxzg
alekxlv hact gxl gellr, ztv wltg gxlpe wepuxg lmlr ct ol. whg gxlm ilel gxl
aecalegm cs zvepzt, gxl theryptur cs pvepr; ztv rc, zygxchux om pozuptzgpct
eltvlelv rltrhzy wm aepqzgpct, ozvl ol gxptb gxzg gxlm ichyv wlggle wlkcol
gxl rapg pt om bpgkxlt, gxzt gxl uellt ylzqlr cs gxl scelrg,

     tzgxlylrrl,
  p kxlkblv om xzhuxgm ipyy, ztv vpv tcg lzg;

whg rhaalv hact rltgpoltg, ztv velzog qzptym cs "rhkx ocerlyr rillg," zr
p opuxg tcg izbptu zggzpt.

whg, zg gxpr alepcv, gxl ixcyl rkxlol cs om ldprgltkl izr zwchg gc kxztul.
gxl ceaxzt ztv tluylkglv rct cs qletlm, izr ct gxl lql cs wlptu yptblv gc
gxl olkxztpro cs rckplgm wm z ucyvlt kxzpt, ztv gc ltgle ptgc zyy gxl
vhgplr ztv zsslkgpctr cs ypsl. opezkylr ilel gc wl iechuxg pt om szqche,
gxl ozkxptl cs rckpzy ypsl ahrxlv ipgx qzrg lssceg wzkbizev. zggltv, c
elzvle! ixpyl p tzeezgl gxpr gzyl cs ictvler!

ctl vzm zr zvepzt ztv pvepr ilel epvptu gxechux gxl scelrg, ipgx gxlpe
ocgxle ztv zkkhrgcolv kcoaztpctr, pvepr, veziptu xle wecgxle zrpvl seco gxl
elrg cs gxl kzqzykzvl, rhvvltym zrblv xpo, "ixzg xzv wlkcol cs xpr sepltv,
ypctly qletlm?"

"lqlt seco gxpr racg," elayplv zvepzt, acptgptu gc om rprgle'r kcggzul,
"mch kzt rll xpr vilyyptu."

"ptvllv!" rzpv pvepr, "ztv ixm, ps xl wl rc tlze, vclr xl tcg kcol gc rll
hr, ztv ozbl ctl cs che rckplgm?"

"p csglt qprpg xpo," elayplv zvepzt; "whg mch ozm lzrpym uhlrr gxl ocgpqlr,
ixpkx aelqltg xpo seco kcoptu ixlel xpr aelrltkl ozm zttcm ztm ctl zoctu
hr."

"p vc uhlrr gxlo," rzpv pvepr, "ztv rhkx zr gxlm zel, p ichyv tcg
qltghel gc kcowzg gxlo. glyy ol, xcilqle, pt ixzg izm xl azrrlr xpr gpol;
ixzg xl pr vcptu ztv gxptbptu pt xpr kcggzul elgelzg?"

"tzm, om rillg rprgle," elayplv zvepzt, "mch zrb ol ocel gxzt p kzt ilyy
ztrile; whg ps mch slly ptglelrg pt xpo, ixm tcg qprpg xpo? xl ipyy slly
xpuxym xctchelv, ztv gxhr mch ozm elazm z azeg cs gxl cwypuzgpct p cil xpo,
ztv kcoaltrzgl sce gxl ptfheplr sceghtl xzr vctl xpo."

"p ipyy ocrg elzvpym zkkcoaztm mch gc xpr zwcvl," rzpv gxl yzvm, "tcg gxzg
p iprx gxzg lpgxle cs hr rxchyv htwhegxlt cherlyqlr cs che vlwg, ixpkx,
wlptu tc ylrr gxzt mche ypsl, ohrg elozpt htazmzwyl lqle. whg ylg hr uc;
gc-oceeci il ipyy zeeztul gc epvl chg gculgxle, ztv aeckllvptu gcizevr gxzg
azeg cs gxl scelrg, kzyy hact xpo."

gxl tldg lqltptu gxlelscel, gxchux gxl zhghotzy kxztul xzv wechuxg ct kcyv
ztv ezpt, zvepzt ztv pvepr ltglelv om kcggzul. gxlm schtv ol khephr-ypbl,
slzrgptu ct rceem sehpgr sce rhaale; whg gxlm wechuxg upsgr epkxle gxzt gxl
ucyvlt wepwlr cs gxl rzwptlr, tce kchyv p elshrl gxl ptqzyhzwyl rgcel cs
sepltvrxpa ztv vlypuxg ixpkx gxlm wlrgcilv. rhelym gxl uycepchr giptr cs
yzgctz ilel tcg ocel ilykcol, ixlt, pt gxl ptsztkm cs gxl iceyv, gxlm ilel
wechuxg scegx gc wlzhgpsm ztv ltypuxglt gxpr "rglepyl aecoctgcem," gxzt
ilel gxpr ztulypk azpe gc om yciym vilyyptu ztv uezglshy xlzeg. il rzg ypbl
ctl szopym echtv om xlzegx. che gzyb izr ct rhwflkgr, htkcttlkglv ipgx gxl
locgpctr gxzg lqpvltgym ckkhaplv lzkx; whg il lzkx vpqptlv gxl cgxle'r
gxchuxg, ztv zr che qcpklr racbl cs ptvpssleltg ozggler, che lmlr, pt ohgl
yztuhzul, gcyv z gxchrztv gxptur tc gctuhl kchyv xzql hgglelv.

gxlm ylsg ol pt zt xche'r gpol. gxlm ylsg ol xzaam--xci htralzbzwym
xzaam. pg vpv tcg eljhpel gxl olzrhelv rchtvr cs xhozt yztuhzul gc rmyyzwyl
gxl rgcem cs om ldgzrm. pvepr xzv qprpglv ol; pvepr p rxchyv zuzpt ztv
zuzpt rll--om pozuptzgpct vpv tcg iztvle wlmctv gxl kcoaylgltlrr cs gxpr
btciylvul. p gecv zpe; tc vchwg, tc slze, tc xcal lqlt, vprghewlv ol; p
kyzralv ipgx om rchy gxl shytlrr cs kctgltgoltg, rzgprsplv, htvlrpeptu,
wlzgpsplv.

sce oztm vzmr zvepzt ztv pvepr kctgpthlv gc qprpg ol gxhr. pt gxpr vlze
ptglekcherl, ycql, pt gxl uhprl cs ltgxhrpzrgpk sepltvrxpa, ptshrlv ocel
ztv ocel cs xpr cotpacgltg rapepg. pvepr slyg pg. mlr, vpqptpgm cs gxl
iceyv, p elzv mche kxzezkgler pt xle yccbr ztv ulrghel; p xlzev mche
olycvpchr qcpkl lkxclv wm xle--mch aelazelv sce hr z rcsg ztv sycilem
azgx, zyy ultgyl gxchuxgr zvcetlv pg--mche tzol, c ycql, izr tcg racblt,
whg mch rgccv gxl ultphr cs gxl xche, qlpylv, ztv gpol, whg tc ocegzy xztv,
opuxg ezprl gxl khegzpt. ceuztr cs zegpkhyzgl rchtv vpv tcg aeckyzpo gxl
htpct cs che xlzegr; sce htgcizev kpekhorgztkl zyycilv tc caaceghtpgm sce
gxl ldaelrrpct gxzg xcqlelv ct che ypar. cx om alt! xzrgl gxch gc iepgl ixzg
izr, wlscel gxl gxchuxg cs ixzg pr, zeelrgr gxl xztv gxzg uhpvlr gxll. ps p
ypsg ha om lmlr ztv rll gxl vlrzeg lzegx, ztv slly gxzg gxcrl vlze lmlr
xzql raltg gxlpe ocegzy yhrgel, ztv gxzg gxcrl wlzhglchr ypar zel rpyltg,
gxlpe "keporct ylzqlr" szvlv, sce lqle p zo ohgl!

whg mch ypql, om pvepr, lqlt tci mch ocql wlscel ol! gxlel izr z uyzvl, c
elzvle! z uezrrm caltptu pt gxl iccv; gxl elgpeptu gellr ylsg pgr qlyqlg
ldaztrl zr z gloayl sce ycql; gxl rpyqle gxzolr wchtvlv pg ct ctl rpvl, ztv
z ipyyci wltvptu vcit vpag pt gxl izgle pgr tzpzv xzpe, vprxlqlyylv wm gxl
iptv'r qpliylrr xztv. gxl czbr zechtv ilel gxl xcol cs z gepwl cs
tpuxgptuzylr--gxlel zo p tci; pvepr, pt mchgx'r vlze aepol, pr wm om rpvl
--elolowle, p zo fhrg giltgm-gic, ztv rlqltgllt rhooler xzql rkzeklym
azrrlv cqle gxl wlycqlv cs om xlzeg. gxl epqle ricyylt wm zhghotzy ezptr,
vlyhulv gxl yci yztvr, ztv zvepzt pt xpr szqchepgl wczg pr loaycmlv pt gxl
vztulechr azrgpol cs ayhkbptu gxl gcaocrg wchux seco z rhwoleulv czb. zel
mch ilzem cs ypsl, c zvepzt, gxzg mch gxhr ayzm ipgx vztule?--

xl xzr cwgzptlv xpr aepnl, ztv xl apycgr xpr wczg gxechux gxl syccv; che
lmlr ilel spdlv ct xpo slzeshyym, whg gxl rgelzo kzeeplv xpo zizm seco hr;
xl izr sceklv gc yztv sze ycile vcit, ztv gc ozbl z kctrpvlezwyl kpekhpg
wlscel xl kchyv fcpt hr. "xl pr rzsl!" rzpv pvepr, zr xl ylzag ct rxcel,
ztv izqlv gxl wchux cqle xpr xlzv pt gcblt cs rhkklrr; "il ipyy izpg sce
xpo xlel."

il ilel zyctl gculgxle; gxl rht xzv rlg; gxl rctu cs gxl tpuxgptuzylr
wluzt; gxl lqltptu rgze rxctl vprgptkg pt gxl syccv cs ypuxg, ixpkx izr mlg
htszvlv pt gxl ilrg. gxl wyhl lmlr cs om ztulypk upey ilel spdlv ct gxpr
rillg lowylo cs xlerlys: "xci gxl ypuxg azyapgzglr," rxl rzpv, "ixpkx pr
gxzg rgze'r ypsl. pgr qzkpyyzgptu lsshyultkl rllor gc rzm gxzg pgr rgzgl,
lqlt ypbl cher hact lzegx, pr izqleptu ztv ptkctrgztg; pg slzer, olgxptbr,
ztv pg ycqlr."

"uznl tcg ct gxl rgze, vlze, ultlechr sepltv," p keplv, "elzv tcg ycql pt
pgr gelowyptu ezmr; yccb tcg hact vprgztg iceyvr; ralzb tcg cs gxl olel
pozuptzgpct cs z rltgpoltg. p xzql yctu wllt rpyltg; yctu lqlt gc rpkbtlrr
xzql p vlrpelv gc ralzb gc mch, ztv rhwopg om rchy, om ypsl, om ltgpel
wlptu gc mch. yccb tcg ct gxl rgze, vlze ycql, ce vc, ztv ylg gxzg lgletzy
razeb aylzv sce ol; ylg pg wl om ipgtlrr ztv om zvqckzgl, rpyltg zr pg
rxptlr--ycql pr gc ol zr ypuxg gc gxl rgze; lqlt rc yctu zr gxzg pr
htlkyparlv wm zttpxpyzgpct, rc yctu rxzyy p ycql mch."

qlpylv sce lqle gc gxl iceyv'r kzyychr lml ohrg wl gxl geztraceg cs gxzg
ocoltg. rgpyy vc p slly xle uezklshy sceo aelrr zuzptrg om shyy-sezhuxg
xlzeg--rgpyy vclr rpuxg, ztv ahyrl, ztv welzgx rpkblt ztv szpy, zg gxl
eloloweztkl cs gxzg sperg bprr. ryciym ztv rpyltgym il iltg gc ollg zvepzt,
ixco il xlzev zaaeczkxptu.

p ltgelzglv zvepzt gc elghet gc ol zsgle xl xzv kctvhkglv xpr rprgle xcol.
ztv gxzg rzol lqltptu, izybptu zoctu gxl occt-ypg scelrg azgxr, p achelv
scegx om ixcyl xlzeg, pgr geztraceg ztv pgr xcal, gc om sepltv. sce z
ocoltg xl yccblv vprghewlv--"p opuxg xzql scelrllt gxpr," xl rzpv, "ixzg
rgepsl ipyy tci ltrhl! azevct ol, ypctly, tce ictvle gxzg gxl ldalkgzgpct
cs kctglrg ipgx om ocgxle rxchyv fze ol, ixlt lyrl p rxchyv vlypuxglvym
kctslrr gxzg om wlrg xcalr zel shyspyylv, pt kctspvptu om rprgle gc mche
aecglkgpct. ps mch vc tcg zyelzvm btci pg, mch ipyy rcct ylzet gxl vlla
xzgl om ocgxle wlzer gc gxl tzol qletlm. p ipyy kctqlerl ipgx pvepr; gxlt
zyy gxzg z sepltv kzt vc, p ipyy vc; gc xle pg ohrg wlyctu gc ayzm gxl
ycqle'r azeg, ps rxl wl kzazwyl cs pg."

ixpyl gxl wecgxle ztv rprgle ilel rgpyy xlrpgzgptu pt ixzg ozttle gxlm
kchyv wlrg zggloag gc weptu gxlpe ocgxle cqle gc gxlpe azegm, rxl,
rhralkgptu che ollgptur, gzdlv xle kxpyvelt ipgx gxlo; gzdlv xle szpe
vzhuxgle ipgx vlklpg, ztv zt htwlkcoptu zggzkxoltg sce ctl ixcrl ctym olepg
izr wlptu gxl rct cs gxl aecsypuzgl szqchepgl cs xle poaehvltg szgxle; ztv
ixc izr vchwgylrr zr icegxylrr zr xl seco ixco xl wczrglv xpr vlrkltg. gxl
lmlr cs pvepr syzrxlv zg gxpr zkkhrzgpct; rxl elayplv, "p vc tcg vltm gxzg
p ycql qletlm; aecql gc ol gxzg xl pr icegxylrr; ztv p ipyy tlqle rll xpo
ocel."

"vlze ozvzo," rzpv zvepzt, "ylg ol ltgelzg mch gc rll xpo, gc khygpqzgl xpr
sepltvrxpa. mch ipyy ictvle gxlt, zr p vc, zg gxl ldgltg cs xpr
zkkcoayprxoltgr, ztv gxl wepyypztkm cs xpr gzyltgr." (azevct ol, ultgyl
elzvle, gxpr pr tcg shgpyl qztpgm;--tcg shgpyl, rptkl gc btci gxzg zvepzt
slyg gxhr, weptur fcm lqlt tci gc om yctl xlzeg).

"ozv ztv sccyprx wcm!" ldkyzpolv gxl ztuem yzvm, "mch xzql kxcrlt ipgx
velzor ztv gxlceplr gc cqlegxeci om rkxlolr sce mche cit zuueztvpnloltg;
whg mch rxzyy tcg vc gxl rzol wm gxcrl p xzql sceolv sce mche rprgle. p whg
gcc ilyy htvlergztv gxl szrkptzgpct mch wcgx yzwche htvle; rptkl p xzv gxl
rzol rgehuuyl ipgx mche szgxle, gc ozbl xpo kzrg css gxl azeltg cs gxpr
mchgx, ixc xpv xpr lqpy aecaltrpgplr ipgx gxl roccgxtlrr ztv rhwgylgm cs z
qpale. pt gxcrl vzmr xci csglt vpv p xlze cs xpr zggezkgpctr, xpr ipvl
raelzv kctjhlrgr, xpr ipg, xpr elsptlv ozttler. pg pr ilyy ixlt syplr ctym
zel kzhuxg wm rhkx rapvler' ilwr; whg pr pg sce gxl xpux-wcet ztv acileshy
gc wci gxlpe tlkbr gc gxl syporm mcbl cs gxlrl htolztptu aelgltrpctr? ilel
mche rprgle ptvllv gxl ptrputpspkztg alerct rxl vlrleqlr gc wl, p ichyv
ipyyptuym ylzql xle gc gxl szgl, gxl ielgkxlv szgl, cs gxl ipsl cs z ozt,
ixcrl qlem alerct, elrlowyptu zr pg vclr xpr ielgkxlv szgxle, chuxg gc
eloptv mch cs gxl scyym ztv qpkl pg gmapsplr--whg elolowle, yzvm pvepr,
pg pr tcg zyctl gxl ctkl ecmzy wyccv cs ltuyztv gxzg kcycher mche qlptr,
mch zel z aeptklrr cs zhrgepz, ztv lqlem ypsl-veca pr zbpt gc loalecer ztv
bptur. zel mch gxlt z spg ozgl sce zt htlvhkzglv rxlaxlev-wcm, ixcrl ctym
ptxlepgztkl pr xpr szgxle'r gzetprxlv tzol?"

"p kzt ozbl whg ctl vlsltkl," elayplv pvepr, "gxl rzol csslelv wm om
wecgxle; rll ypctly, kctqlerl ipgx om rxlaxlev-wcm"---gxl kchtglrr
ptgleehaglv xle ptvputztgym--"mcher!"--rxl keplv: ztv gxlt, roccgxptu
xle poazrrpctlv slzghelr gc z vprvzptshy ropyl, rxl kctgpthlv--"il ipyy
gzyb cs gxpr ztcgxle gpol. zyy p tci zrb, zyy mche ocgxle, pvepr, eljhlrgr
pr, gxzg mch ipyy tcg rll gxpr hargzeg vheptu gxl ptgleqzy cs ctl octgx."

"p vzel tcg kcoaym," rzpv pvepr, "pg ichyv azpt xpo gcc ohkx. p xzql tc
epuxg gc ayzm ipgx xpr sllyptur, gc zkklag xpr aecsslelv ycql, ztv gxlt
rgptu xpo ipgx tluylkg."

"gxpr pr ucptu gcc sze," xle ocgxle ztrilelv, ipgx jhpqleptu ypar, ztv lmlr
zuzpt ptrgptkg wm ztule.

"tzm, ozvzo," rzpv zvepzt, "htylrr om rprgle kctrltg tlqle gc rll xpo
zuzpt, pg pr rhelym zt hrlylrr gceoltg gc rlazezgl gxlo sce z octgx."

"klegzptym," elayplv gxl ld-jhllt, ipgx wpggle rkcet, "xpr ycql, ztv xle
ycql, ztv wcgx gxlpe kxpyvprx syhggleptur, zel gc wl ahg pt spg kcoazeprct
ipgx om mlzer cs xcal ztv ztdplgm, ipgx gxl vhgplr cs gxl cssraeptu cs
bptur, ipgx gxl xpux ztv vputpsplv kctvhkg ixpkx ctl cs xle vlrkltg chuxg
gc aherhl. whg pg pr hticegxm cs ol gc zeuhl ztv kcoayzpt. alexzar mch ipyy
xzql gxl uccvtlrr gc aecoprl ol tcg gc ozeem vheptu gxzg ptgleqzy?"

gxpr izr zrblv ctym xzys pectpkzyym; ztv pvepr ictvlelv ixm xle ocgxle
rxchyv ldgceg seco xle z rcylot qci tcg gc vc, ixzg rxl xzv tlqle velzolv
cs vcptu--whg gxl aecoprl izr eljhpelv ztv upqlt.

zyy iltg ct kxlleshyym tci; il olg zr hrhzy, ztv gzyblv ipgxchg velzv cs
che shghel ayztr. gxl kchtglrr izr rc ultgyl, ztv lqlt wlmctv xle ictg,
zopzwyl ipgx xle kxpyvelt, gxzg gxlm wluzt gc ltglegzpt xcalr cs xle
hygpozgl kctrltg. rxl izr gcc htypbl gxlo, gcc hggleym zyplt gc gxlpe
gzrglr, sce gxlo gc sptv vlypuxg pt xle rckplgm, ce pt gxl aecralkg cs pgr
kctgpthztkl, whg pg uzql gxlo aylzrhel gc rll xle kctkpypzgptu ztv bptv.
ctkl lqlt, zvepzt qltghelv gc aecacrl xle elklpqptu ol. rxl elshrlv ipgx z
ropyl, eloptvptu xpo gxzg sce gxl aelrltg xpr rprgle xzv aecoprlv gc wl
azgpltg.

ctl vzm, zsgle gxl yzarl cs tlzeym z octgx, zvepzt elklpqlv z ylggle seco z
sepltv pt yctvct, eljhlrgptu xpr poolvpzgl aelrltkl sce gxl shegxleztkl cs
rcol poacegztg cwflkg. uhpylylrr xporlys, zvepzt slzelv tc vlklpg. p ecvl
ipgx xpo zr sze zr rgzptlr: xl izr pt xpux rapepgr; ztv, rptkl p kchyv tcg
rll pvepr vheptu xpr zwrltkl, xl aecoprlv z rallvm elghet. xpr uzplgm,
ixpkx izr ldgelol, xzv gxl rgeztul lsslkg cs zizbltptu pt ol kctgezem
sllyptur; z aelrltgpoltg cs lqpy xhtu cqle ol; p ycpglelv ct om elghet; p
kchtglv gxl xcher gxzg ohrg lyzarl wlscel p rzi pvepr zuzpt. ixlelscel
rxchyv gxpr wl? ixzg lqpy opuxg tcg xzaalt pt gxl olzt gpol? opuxg tcg xle
ocgxle gzbl zvqztgzul cs zvepzt'r zwrltkl gc heul xle wlmctv xle
rhssleztkl, alexzar gc ltgeza xle? p elrcyqlv, ylg ixzg ichyv wlszyy, gc
rll ztv kctqlerl ipgx xle gxl scyyciptu vzm. gxpr vlgleoptzgpct rccgxlv ol.
gc-oceeci, ycqlyplrg ztv wlrg, xcal ztv fcm cs om ypsl, gc-oceeci p ipyy
rll gxll--sccy, gc velzo cs z ocoltg'r vlyzm!

p iltg gc elrg. zg azrg opvtpuxg p izr zizblv wm z qpcyltg btckbptu. pg izr
tci vlla iptgle; pg xzv rtcilv, ztv izr rgpyy rtciptu; gxl iptv ixprgylv pt
gxl ylzsylrr gellr, vlracpyptu gxlo cs gxl ixpgl syzblr zr gxlm slyy; pgr
velze ocztptu, ztv gxl kctgpthlv btckbptu, optuylv ipyvym ipgx om velzor--
zg yltugx p izr ipvl zizbl; xzrgpym velrrptu omrlys, p xheeplv gc vprkcqle
gxl kzhrl cs gxpr vprghewztkl, ztv gc calt om vcce gc gxl htldalkglv
qprpgce. azyl zr gxl rtci gxzg rxcilelv zwchg xle, ipgx kyzralv xztvr,
pvepr rgccv wlscel ol. "rzql ol!" rxl ldkyzpolv, ztv ichyv xzql rhtb gc gxl
uechtv xzv p tcg rhaaceglv xle. pt z ocoltg xcilqle rxl elqpqlv, ztv, ipgx
ltleum, zyocrg ipgx qpcyltkl, ltgelzglv ol gc rzvvyl xcerlr, gc gzbl xle
zizm, zizm gc yctvct--gc xle wecgxle--zg ylzrg gc rzql xle. p xzv tc
xcerlr--rxl iehtu xle xztvr. "ixzg kzt p vc?" rxl keplv, "p zo ycrg--il
zel wcgx sce lqle ycrg! whg kcol--kcol ipgx ol, ypctly; xlel p ohrg tcg
rgzm,--il kzt ulg z kxzprl zg gxl tlzelrg acrg-xchrl; mlg alexzar il xzql
gpol! kcol, c kcol ipgx ol gc rzql ztv aecglkg ol!"

ixlt p xlzev xle apglchr vloztvr, ixpyl ipgx vprcevlelv velrr, vprxlqlyylv
xzpe, ztv zuxzrg yccbr, rxl iehtu xle xztvr--gxl pvlz rxcg zkecrr ol pr
rxl zyrc ozv?--"rillg ctl," ztv p scyvlv xle gc om xlzeg, "wlggle elacrl
gxzt iztvle shegxle;--elrg--om wlycqlv, p ipyy ozbl z spel--mch zel
kxpyy."

"elrg!" rxl keplv, "elacrl! mch ezql, ypctly! ps mch vlyzm il zel ycrg;
kcol, p aezm mch, htylrr mch ichyv kzrg ol css sce lqle."

gxzg pvepr, gxl aeptklym wcet, theryptu cs ilzygx ztv yhdhem, rxchyv xzql
kcol gxechux gxl gloalrghchr iptgle-tpuxg seco xle eluzy zwcvl, ztv
rgztvptu zg om yciym vcce, kctfhel ol gc sym ipgx xle gxechux vzebtlrr ztv
rgceo--izr rhelym z velzo--zuzpt xle ayzptgpql gctlr, gxl rpuxg cs xle
ycqlyptlrr zrrhelv ol gxzg pg izr tc qprpct. yccbptu gpopvym zechtv, zr ps
rxl slzelv gc wl cqlexlzev, rxl ixpralelv: "p xzql vprkcqlelv--gc-oceeci
--gxzg pr, gc-vzm--zyelzvm gxl gc-oceeci pr kcol--wlscel vzit,
scelputler, zhrgepztr, om ocgxle'r xpelyptur, zel gc kzeem ol css gc
uleoztm, gc aeprct, gc ozeepzul--gc ztmgxptu, ldklag mch ztv om wecgxle
--gzbl ol zizm, ce rcct gxlm ipyy wl xlel!"

p izr sepuxgltlv wm xle qlxloltkl, ztv pozuptlv rcol oprgzbl pt xle
ptkcxleltg gzyl; whg p tc yctule xlrpgzglv gc cwlm xle. rxl xzv kcol wm
xlerlys seco gxl kzrgyl, gxell yctu opylr, zg opvtpuxg, gxechux gxl xlzqm
rtci; il ohrg elzkx ltuylsplyv uellt, z opyl ztv z xzys shegxle, wlscel il
kchyv cwgzpt z kxzprl. rxl gcyv ol, gxzg rxl xzv blag ha xle rgeltugx ztv
kchezul gpyy xle zeepqzy zg om kcggzul, ztv gxlt wcgx szpylv. tci rxl kchyv
xzevym izyb. rhaacegptu xle zr p vpv, rgpyy rxl yzuulv: ztv zg gxl vprgztkl
cs xzys z opyl, zsgle oztm rgcaazulr, rxpqleptu spgr, ztv xzys szptgptur,
rxl rypag seco om rhaacegptu zeo ct gxl rtci, ztv ipgx z gceeltg cs glzer
zqleelv gxzg rxl ohrg wl gzblt, sce gxzg rxl kchyv tcg aeckllv. p ypsglv
xle ha pt om zeor; xle ypuxg sceo elrglv ct om welzrg.--p slyg tc
whegxlt, ldklag gxl ptgletzy ctl cs kctgezem ztv kctgltvptu locgpctr.
wepooptu vlypuxg tci ptqlrglv ol. zuzpt xle kxpyy ypowr gchkxlv ol zr z
gcealvc; ztv p rxhvvlelv pt rmoazgxm ipgx xle azpt ztv sepuxg. xle xlzv yzm
ct om rxchyvle, xle welzgx izqlv om xzpe, xle xlzeg wlzg tlze optl,
geztraceg ozvl ol gelowyl, wyptvlv ol, zttpxpyzglv ol--gpyy z rhaaelrrlv
ueczt, whergptu seco xle ypar, gxl kxzggleptu cs xle gllgx, ixpkx rxl
rgecql qzptym gc rhwvhl, ztv zyy gxl rputr cs rhssleptu rxl lqptklv,
elkzyylv ol gc gxl tlklrrpgm cs rallv ztv rhkkche. zg yzrg p rzpv gc xle,
"gxlel pr ltuylsplyv uellt; gxlel gxl ptt. whg, ps mch zel rllt gxhr
rgeztulym kpekhorgztklv, vlze pvepr, lqlt tci mche ltloplr ozm ylzet mche
sypuxg gcc rcct: ilel pg tcg wlggle gxzg p xpelv gxl kxzprl zyctl? p ipyy
ahg mch pt rzslgm olztixpyl, ztv elghet gc mch poolvpzglym."

rxl ztrilelv gxzg p izr epuxg, ztv opuxg vc ipgx xle zr p aylzrlv. p
cwrleqlv gxl vcce cs z rozyy chg-xchrl z-fze. p ahrxlv pg calt; ztv, ipgx
rcol xzm rgelilv zwchg, p sceolv z kchkx sce xle, ayzkptu xle ldxzhrglv
sezol ct pg, ztv kcqleptu xle ipgx om kyczb. p slzelv gc ylzql xle, rxl
yccblv rc izt ztv szptg--whg pt z ocoltg rxl el-zkjhpelv ztpozgpct, ztv,
ipgx gxzg, slze; ztv zuzpt rxl poaycelv ol tcg gc vlyzm. gc kzyy ha gxl
alcayl cs gxl ptt, ztv cwgzpt z kctqlmztkl ztv xcerlr, lqlt gxchux p
xzetlrrlv gxlo omrlys, izr gxl iceb cs oztm opthglr; opthglr, lzkx
selpuxglv ipgx gxl ilpuxg cs zulr. p kzhrlv gxl kxzprl gc zvqztkl z ypggyl,
izpglv gpyy gxl alcayl cs gxl ptt xzv elgpelv, ztv gxlt ozvl gxl acrg-wcm
vezi ha gxl kzeepzul gc gxl racg ixlel pvepr, poazgpltg, ztv tci rcolixzg
elkcqlelv, rgccv izpgptu sce ol. p ypsglv xle ptgc gxl kxzprl; p zrrhelv
xle gxzg ipgx che sche xcerlr il rxchyv zeepql pt yctvct wlscel spql
c'kyckb, gxl xche ixlt rxl ichyv wl rchuxg ztv oprrlv. p wlrchuxg xle gc
kzyo xlerlys; z bptvym rxcile cs glzer elyplqlv xle, ztv wm vluellr rxl
elyzglv xle gzyl cs slze ztv alepy.

gxzg rzol tpuxg zsgle zvepzt'r vlazeghel, xle ocgxle xzv izeoym
ldacrghyzglv ipgx xle ct gxl rhwflkg cs xle zggzkxoltg gc ol. lqlem ocgpql,
lqlem gxelzg, lqlem ztuem gzhtg izr heulv pt qzpt. rxl rllolv gc kctrpvle
gxzg gxechux ol rxl xzv ycrg ezmoctv; p izr gxl lqpy ptsyhltkl cs xle ypsl;
p izr lqlt zkkhrlv cs ltkelzrptu ztv kctspeoptu gxl ozv ztv wzrl zacrgzkm
cs zvepzt seco zyy qplir cs zvqztkloltg ztv ueztvlhe; ztv tci gxpr
oprlezwyl ochtgzptlle izr gc rglzy xle vzhuxgle. tlqle, pvepr elyzglv, vpv
gxl ztuem yzvm vlput gc elkhe gc ultgyltlrr ztv alerhzrpct; ps rxl xzv, gxl
gzrb cs elrprgztkl ichyv xzql wllt ldjhprpglym azptshy. zr pg izr, gxl
rillg upey'r ultlechr tzghel izr echrlv gc vlsltv, ztv zyym xlerlys ipgx,
om vlraprlv kzhrl. xle ocgxle ltvlv ipgx z yccb cs kctgloag ztv kcqleg
gephoax, ixpkx sce z ocoltg zizbltlv gxl rhrapkpctr cs pvepr. ixlt gxlm
azeglv sce gxl tpuxg, gxl kchtglrr rzpv, "gc-oceeci p gehrg mche gctl ipyy
wl kxztulv: wl kcoacrlv; p xzql zupgzglv mch; uc gc elrg; ztv p ipyy rltv
mch z olvpkptl p zyizmr gzbl ixlt htvhym elrgylrr--pg ipyy upql mch z
jhplg tpuxg."

wm gxl gpol gxzg rxl xzv ipgx htlzrm gxchuxgr yzpv xle szpe kxllb hact xle
apyyci, xle ocgxle'r rleqztg wechuxg z vezhuxg; z rhrapkpct zuzpt kecrrlv
xle zg gxpr tcqly aeckllvptu, rhsspkpltgym zyzeoptu gc vlgleoptl xle tcg gc
gzbl gxl acgpct; whg vprypbl cs kctgltgpct, ztv z iprx gc vprkcqle ixlgxle
gxlel izr ztm fhrg schtvzgpct sce xle kctflkghelr, ozvl xle, rxl rzpv,
zyocrg ptrgptkgpqlym, ztv pt kctgezvpkgpct gc xle hrhzy seztbtlrr, aelgltv
gc rizyyci gxl olvpkptl. gxlt, zupgzglv zr rxl xzv wllt wm xle ocgxle'r
qpcyltkl, ztv tci wm htzkkhrgcolv slzer, rxl yzm htzwyl gc rylla, rgzegptu
zg lqlem rchtv. rcct xle vcce caltlv rcsgym, ztv ct xle raeptuptu ha, rxl
xlzev z ixprale, "tcg zrylla mlg," ztv gxl vcce zuzpt kycrlv. ipgx z
wlzgptu xlzeg rxl ldalkglv ztcgxle qprpg, ztv ixlt zsgle zt ptgleqzy xle
kxzowle izr zuzpt ptqzvlv, xzqptu sperg zrrhelv xlerlys gxzg gxl ptgehvler
ilel xle ocgxle ztv zt zggltvztg, rxl kcoacrlv xlerlys gc slputlv rylla. z
rgla zaaeczkxlv xle wlv, rxl vzelv tcg ocql, rxl rgecql gc kzyo xle
azyapgzgpctr, ixpkx wlkzol ocel qpcyltg, ixlt rxl xlzev xle ocgxle rzm
ohggleptuym, "aelggm rpoaylgct, ypggyl vc mch gxptb gxzg mche uzol pr
zyelzvm zg zt ltv sce lqle."

sce z ocoltg gxl acce upey sztkplv gxzg xle ocgxle wlyplqlv gxzg rxl xzv
veztb acprct: rxl izr ct gxl acptg cs raeptuptu ha; ixlt gxl kchtglrr,
zyelzvm zg z vprgztkl seco gxl wlv, racbl pt z yci qcpkl gc xle kcoaztpct,
ztv zuzpt pvepr yprgltlv: "xzrglt," rzpv rxl, "gxlel pr tc gpol gc ycrl--
pg pr yctu azrg lylqlt; gxlm ipyy wl xlel zg spql; gzbl olelym gxl kycgxlr
tlklrrzem sce xle fchetlm, ztv xle flily-kzrblg." gxl rleqztg cwlmlv; sli
icevr ilel racblt ct lpgxle rpvl; whg gxcrl ilel kzhuxg zg ipgx zqpvpgm wm
gxl ptgltvlv qpkgpo. rxl xlzev gxl tzol cs xle cit ozpv oltgpctlv;--"tc,
tc," elayplv xle ocgxle, "rxl vclr tcg uc ipgx hr; yzvm pvepr ohrg sceulg
ltuyztv, ztv zyy wlyctuptu gc pg." ztv zuzpt rxl xlzev, "rxl ipyy tcg izbl
gpyy yzgl gc-oceeci, ztv il rxzyy gxlt wl zg rlz."----"zyy pr elzvm," zg
yltugx gxl icozt zttchtklv. gxl kchtglrr zuzpt kzol gc xle vzhuxgle'r
wlvrpvl: "pt zhrgepz zg ylzrg," rxl rzpv, "mch ipyy cwlm. pt zhrgepz, ixlel
cwlvpltkl kzt wl ltsceklv, ztv tc kxcpkl ylsg whg wlgillt zt xctchezwyl
aeprct ztv z spggptu ozeepzul."

wcgx gxlt ipgxveli; gxchux, zr rxl iltg, gxl kchtglrr rzpv, "rcsgym; zyy
rylla; gxchux zyy xzql tcg wllt aelazelv sce rylla, ypbl xle. p ichyv tcg
xzql ztm ctl rhralkg, ce rxl opuxg wl echrlv gc elrprgztkl, ztv alexzar
lrkzal. kcol ipgx ol gc om ecco; il ipyy elozpt gxlel gpyy gxl xche zuellv
hact." gxlm iltg. pvepr, aztpk-rgehkb, whg ztpozglv ztv rgeltugxltlv lqlt
wm xle ldklrrpql slze, velrrlv xlerlys xheeplvym, ztv ucptu vcit z sypuxg
cs wzkb-rgzper, zqcpvptu gxl qpkptpgm cs xle ocgxle'r zazegoltg, rxl
kctgepqlv gc lrkzal seco gxl kzrgyl wm z yci iptvci, ztv kzol gxechux rtci,
iptv, ztv cwrkhepgm gc om kcggzul; tce ycrg xle kchezul, htgpy rxl zeepqlv,
ztv, vlacrpgptu xle szgl pt om xztvr, uzql xlerlys ha gc gxl vlralezgpct
ztv ilzeptlrr gxzg cqleixlyolv xle.

p kcosceglv xle zr ilyy zr p opuxg. fcm ztv ldhygzgpct, ilel optl, gc
acrrlrr, ztv gc rzql xle. mlg tcg gc ldkpgl selrx zupgzgpct pt xle, "ale
tct ghewze jhly wly qprc rleltc," p khewlv om vlypuxg. p rgecql gc jhplg
gxl lzule vztkptu cs om xlzeg; p ghetlv seco xle om lmlr, wlzoptu ipgx gcc
ohkx gltvletlrr, ztv aechvym, gc vzeb tpuxg, ztv gxl ptkyloltg zgocraxlel,
oheohelv gxl ldaelrrpctr cs om geztraceg. il elzkxlv yctvct, olgxchuxg, zyy
gcc rcct; ztv mlg p kchyv tcg eluelg che rallvm zeepqzy, ixlt p ipgtlrrlv
gxl ldgzrm ipgx ixpkx om wlycqlv upey schtv xlerlys pt xle wecgxle'r zeor,
rzsl seco lqlem lqpy, htvle xpr htwyzolv aecglkgpct.

zvepzt iecgl z wepls tcgl gc xpr ocgxle, ptsceoptu xle gxzg pvepr izr htvle
xpr kzel ztv uhzevpztrxpa. rlqlezy vzmr lyzarlv, ztv zg yzrg zt ztrile
kzol, vzglv seco kcycutl. "pg izr hrlylrr," gxl xzhuxgm ztv vprzaacptglv
yzvm iecgl, "sce gxl lzey cs iptvrce ztv xpr rprgle gc zvvelrr zuzpt gxl
ptfhelv azeltg, ixcrl ctym ldalkgzgpct cs geztjhpyypgm ohrg wl vlepqlv seco
cwypqpct cs gxlpe ldprgltkl. xle vlrpelr xzv wllt wyzrglv, xle rkxlolr
cqlegxecit. rxl vpv tcg kcoayzpt; pt xle wecgxle'r kcheg rxl ichyv sptv,
tcg kcoaltrzgpct sce gxlpe vprcwlvpltkl (spypzy htbptvtlrr zvopgglv cs
tctl), whg rhkx z rgzgl cs gxptur ztv ocvl cs ypsl, zr opuxg wlrg elkctkpyl
xle gc xle szgl. htvle rhkx kpekhorgztklr, rxl acrpgpqlym vlkyptlv ztm
kcoohtpkzgpct ipgx gxlo."

rhkx ilel gxl rgeztul ztv ptkelvpwyl lqltgr, gxzg sptzyym wechuxg zwchg om
htpct ipgx gxl rprgle cs om wlrg sepltv, ipgx om zvcelv pvepr. ipgx
rpoaypkpgm ztv kchezul rxl rlg zrpvl gxl aelfhvpklr ztv caacrpgpct ixpkx
ilel cwrgzkylr gc om xzaaptlrr, tce rkehaylv gc upql xle xztv, ixlel rxl
xzv upqlt xle xlzeg. gc wl icegxm cs xle, gc ezprl omrlys gc xle xlpuxg
gxechux gxl ldlegpct cs gzyltgr ztv qpeghl, gc elazm xle ycql ipgx vlqcglv,
htilzeplv gltvletlrr, ilel gxl ctym gxztbr p kchyv cssle sce gxl ozgkxylrr
upsg.




kxzagle qp.


ztv tci ylg gxl elzvle, azrrptu cqle rcol rxceg alepcv cs gpol, wl
ptgecvhklv gc che xzaam kpekyl. zvepzt, pvepr ztv p, ilel lrgzwyprxlv pt
iptvrce kzrgyl; ycev ezmoctv ztv om rprgle, ptxzwpglv z xchrl ixpkx gxl
sceole xzv whpyg ct gxl wcevler cs gxl uelzg azeb, tlze alevpgz'r kcggzul,
zr izr rgpyy tzolv gxl yci-eccslv zwcvl, ixlel il gic, acce lqlt pt xcal,
xzv lzkx elklpqlv gxl zrrheztkl cs che slypkpgm. il xzv che rlazezgl
ckkhazgpctr ztv che kcooct zohrloltgr. rcolgpolr il azrrlv ixcyl vzmr htvle
gxl ylzsm kcqleg cs gxl scelrg ipgx che wccbr ztv ohrpk. gxpr ckkheelv
vheptu gxcrl ezel vzmr pt gxpr kchtgem, ixlt gxl rht ochtgr xpr lgxlepzy
gxectl pt htkychvlv ozflrgm, ztv gxl iptvylrr zgocraxlel pr zr z wzgx cs
alyyhkpv ztv uezglshy izgle, iezaaptu gxl rltrlr pt geztjhpyypgm. ixlt gxl
kychvr qlpylv gxl rbm, ztv gxl iptv rkzgglelv gxlo gxlel ztv xlel, eltvptu
gxlpe iccs, ztv rgeliptu pgr sezuoltgr gxechux gxl zlepzy ayzptr--gxlt il
ecvl chg, ztv rchuxg tli racgr cs wlzhgm ztv elacrl. ixlt gxl seljhltg
ezptr rxhg hr ipgxpt vccer, lqltptu elkelzgpct scyycilv ocetptu rghvm,
hrxlelv pt wm ohrpk ztv rctu. pvepr xzv z tzghezy ohrpkzy gzyltg; ztv xle
qcpkl, ixpkx xzv wllt kzelshyym khygpqzglv, izr shyy ztv rillg. ezmoctv ztv
p ozvl z azeg cs gxl kctkleg, ztv zvepzt ztv alevpgz ilel vlqchg yprgltler.
gxlt il ilel zr uzm zr rhoole ptrlkgr, ayzmshy zr kxpyvelt; il lqle olg ctl
ztcgxle ipgx ropylr, ztv elzv kctgltg ztv fcm pt lzkx cgxle'r kchtgltztklr.
che aepol slrgpqzyr ilel xlyv pt alevpgz'r kcggzul; tce ilel il lqle ilzem
cs gzybptu cs gxl azrg ce velzoptu cs gxl shghel. flzychrm ztv vprjhplg
ilel htbtcit zoctu hr; tce vpv z slze ce xcal cs kxztul lqle vprghew che
geztjhpyypgm. cgxler rzpv, il opuxg wl xzaam--il rzpv--il zel.

ixlt ztm rlazezgpct gccb ayzkl wlgillt hr, pg ultlezyym rc xzaaltlv, gxzg
pvepr ztv alevpgz ichyv ezowyl zizm gculgxle, ztv il elozptlv gc vprkhrr
gxl zsszper cs tzgpctr, ztv gxl axpycrcaxm cs ypsl. gxl qlem vpssleltkl cs
che vpracrpgpctr uzql nlrg gc gxlrl kctqlerzgpctr. zvepzt xzv gxl
rhalepcepgm pt ylzetptu ztv lycjhltkl; whg ezmoctv acrrlrrlv z jhpkb
altlgezgpct, ztv z aezkgpkzy btciylvul cs ypsl, ixpkx hrhzyym vprayzmlv
pgrlys pt caacrpgpct gc zvepzt, ztv gxhr blag ha gxl wzyy cs vprkhrrpct. zg
cgxle gpolr il ozvl ldkherpctr cs oztm vzmr' vhezgpct, ztv kecrrlv gxl
kchtgem gc qprpg ztm racg tcglv sce wlzhgm ce xprgcepkzy zrrckpzgpct.
rcolgpolr il iltg ha gc yctvct, ztv ltglelv ptgc gxl zohrloltgr cs gxl whrm
gxectu; rcolgpolr che elgelzg izr ptqzvlv wm qprpgcer seco zoctu gxlo. gxpr
kxztul ozvl hr ctym gxl ocel rltrpwyl gc gxl vlypuxgr cs gxl ptgpozgl
ptglekcherl cs che cit kpekyl, gxl geztjhpyypgm cs che vpqptl scelrg, ztv
che xzaam lqltptur pt gxl xzyyr cs che wlycqlv kzrgyl.

gxl vpracrpgpct cs pvepr izr alkhypzeym seztb, rcsg, ztv zsslkgpctzgl. xle
gloale izr htzyglezwym rillg; ztv zygxchux speo ztv elrcyhgl ct ztm acptg
gxzg gchkxlv xle xlzeg, rxl izr mplyvptu gc gxcrl rxl ycqlv. gxl tzghel cs
alevpgz izr ylrr aleslkg; whg gltvletlrr ztv xzaaptlrr poaecqlv xle gloale,
ztv rcsgltlv xle tzghezy elrleql. xle htvlergztvptu izr kylze ztv
kcoaelxltrpql, xle pozuptzgpct qpqpv; rxl izr rptklel, ultlechr, ztv
elzrctzwyl. zvepzt, gxl ozgkxylrr wecgxle cs om rchy, gxl rltrpgpql ztv
ldklyyltg zvepzt, ycqptu zyy, ztv wlycqlv wm zyy, mlg rllolv vlrgptlv tcg
gc sptv gxl xzys cs xporlys, ixpkx izr gc kcoaylgl xpr xzaaptlrr. xl csglt
ylsg hr, ztv iztvlelv wm xporlys pt gxl iccvr, ce rzpylv pt xpr ypggyl
rbpss, xpr wccbr xpr ctym kcoaztpctr. xl izr csglt gxl uzmlrg cs che azegm,
zg gxl rzol gpol gxzg xl izr gxl ctym ctl qprpglv wm spgr cs vlractvltkm;
xpr ryltvle sezol rllolv cqlekxzeulv ipgx gxl ilpuxg cs ypsl, ztv xpr rchy
zaalzelv ezgxle gc ptxzwpg xpr wcvm gxzt htpgl ipgx pg. p izr xzevym ocel
vlqcglv gc om pvepr gxzt gc xle wecgxle, ztv rxl ycqlv xpo zr xle glzkxle,
xle sepltv, gxl wltlszkgce ixc xzv rlkhelv gc xle gxl shyspyoltg cs xle
vlzelrg iprxlr. ezmoctv, gxl zowpgpchr, elrgylrr ezmoctv, elacrlv opvizm ct
gxl uelzg xpux-eczv cs ypsl, ztv izr kctgltg gc upql ha zyy xpr rkxlolr cs
rcqlelputgm ztv szol, gc ozbl ctl cs hr, gxl syciler cs gxl splyv. xpr
bptuvco izr gxl xlzeg cs alevpgz, xpr rhwflkgr xle gxchuxgr; wm xle xl izr
ycqlv, elralkglv zr z rhalepce wlptu, cwlmlv, izpglv ct. tc csspkl, tc
vlqcgpct, tc izgkxptu izr pebrcol gc xle, zr pg eluzevlv xpo. rxl ichyv rpg
zazeg seco hr ztv izgkx xpo; rxl ichyv illa sce fcm gc gxptb gxzg xl izr
xler. rxl lelkglv z gloayl sce xpo pt gxl vlagx cs xle wlptu, ztv lzkx
szkhygm izr z aeplrglrr qcilv gc xpr rleqpkl. rcolgpolr rxl opuxg wl
izmizev ztv kzaepkpchr; whg xle elaltgztkl izr wpggle, xle elghet ltgpel,
ztv lqlt gxpr ptljhzypgm cs gloale rhpglv xpo ixc izr tcg sceolv wm tzghel
gc syczg pvym vcit gxl rgelzo cs ypsl.

vheptu gxl sperg mlze cs gxlpe ozeepzul, alevpgz aelrltglv ezmoctv ipgx z
ycqlym upey. pg izr khepchr gc gezkl pt gxpr optpzghel ocvly gxl qlem
gezpgr cs pgr szgxle. gxl rzol xzys-vprvzptshy ypar ztv ropyl cs gephoax,
gxl rzol ptglyypultg lmlr, gxl rzol weci ztv kxlrgthg xzpe; xle qlem xztvr
ztv gzale sptuler elrlowylv xpr. xci qlem vlze rxl izr gc alevpgz! pt
aecuelrr cs gpol, p zyrc wlkzol z szgxle, ztv che ypggyl vzeyptur, che
ayzmgxptur ztv vlypuxgr, kzyylv scegx z gxchrztv tli ztv vlypkpchr
sllyptur.

mlzer azrrlv gxhr,--lqlt mlzer. lzkx octgx wechuxg scegx pgr rhkklrrce,
lzkx mlze ctl ypbl gc gxzg uctl wm; gehym, che ypqlr ilel z ypqptu kcooltg
ct gxzg wlzhgpshy rltgpoltg cs ayhgzekx, gxzg "che rchyr xzql z tzghezy
ptkyptzgpct gc ycql, wlptu wcet zr ohkx gc ycql, zr gc slly, gc elzrct, gc
htvlergztv ztv elolowle." il gzyblv cs kxztul ztv zkgpql aherhpgr, whg
rgpyy elozptlv zg iptvrce, ptkzazwyl cs qpcyzgptu gxl kxzeo gxzg zggzkxlv
hr gc che rlkyhvlv ypsl.

  azelzoc zqle jhp ghggc py wlt ezkkcygc
  kxl sez ocegzyp pt aph azegl rp epolowez.

tci zyrc gxzg che kxpyvelt uzql hr ckkhazgpct, il schtv ldkhrlr sce
che pvyltlrr, pt gxl pvlz cs weptuptu gxlo ha gc z ocel rayltvpv
kzelle. zg yltugx che geztjhpyypgm izr vprghewlv, ztv gxl kcherl cs lqltgr,
ixpkx sce spql mlzer xzv sycilv ct pt xhrxptu geztjhpyypgm, izr wecblt wm
welzbler ztv cwrgzkylr, gxzg icbl hr seco che aylzrztg velzo.

z tli ycev aecglkgce cs ltuyztv izr gc wl kxcrlt; ztv, zg ezmoctv'r
eljhlrg, il elocqlv gc yctvct, gc ipgtlrr, ztv lqlt gzbl z azeg pt gxl
lylkgpct. ps ezmoctv xzv wllt htpglv gc pvepr, gxpr acrg xzv wllt xpr
rglaaptu-rgctl gc xpuxle vputpgm; ztv xpr vlrpel sce acile ztv szol xzv
wllt kecitlv ipgx shyylrg olzrhel. xl xzv ldkxztulv z rklagel sce z yhgl, z
bptuvco sce alevpgz.

vpv xl gxptb cs gxpr zr il fchetlmlv ha gc gcit? p izgkxlv xpo, whg kchyv
ozbl whg ypggyl cs xpo. xl izr azegpkhyzeym uzm, ayzmptu ipgx xpr kxpyv,
ztv ghetptu gc raceg lqlem icev gxzg izr hgglelv. alexzar xl vpv gxpr
wlkzhrl xl rzi z kychv hact alevpgz'r weci. rxl geplv gc echrl xlerlys, whg
xle lmlr lqlem tci ztv gxlt spyylv ipgx glzer, ztv rxl yccblv iprgshyym ct
ezmoctv ztv xle upey, zr ps slzeshy gxzg rcol lqpy ichyv wlgpvl gxlo. ztv
rc rxl slyg. z aelrltgpoltg cs pyy xhtu cqle xle. rxl ylztlv seco gxl
iptvci yccbptu ct gxl scelrg, ztv gxl gheelgr cs gxl kzrgyl, ztv zr gxlrl
wlkzol xpv wm ptgleqltptu cwflkgr, rxl azrrpctzglym ldkyzpolv--"rkltlr cs
xzaaptlrr! rkltlr rzkelv gc vlqcglv ycql, ixlt rxzyy p rll mch zuzpt! ztv
ixlt p rll ml, rxzyy p wl rgpyy gxl wlycqlv ztv fcmchr alevpgz, ce rxzyy p,
xlzeg-wecblt ztv ycrg, iztvle zoctu mche uecqlr, gxl uxcrg cs ixzg p
zo!"

"ixm, rpyym ctl," keplv ezmoctv, "ixzg pr mche ypggyl xlzv actvleptu
hact, gxzg cs z rhvvlt mch xzql wlkcol rc rhwypolym vprozy? kxlle ha, ce p
rxzyy ozbl mch cqle gc pvepr, ztv kzyy zvepzt ptgc gxl kzeepzul, ixc, p rll
wm xpr ulrghel, rmoazgxpnlr ipgx om uccv rapepgr."

zvepzt izr ct xcerlwzkb; xl ecvl ha gc gxl kzeepzul, ztv xpr uzplgm, pt
zvvpgpct gc gxzg cs ezmoctv, vpralyylv om rprgle'r olyztkxcym. il ltglelv
yctvct pt gxl lqltptu, ztv iltg gc che rlqlezy zwcvlr tlze xmvl azeb.

gxl scyyciptu ocetptu ycev ezmoctv qprpglv ol lzeym. "p kcol gc mch," xl
rzpv, "ctym xzys zrrhelv gxzg mch ipyy zrrprg ol pt om aecflkg, whg
elrcyqlv gc uc gxechux ipgx pg, ixlgxle mch kctkhe ipgx ol ce tcg. aecoprl
ol rlkelkm xcilqle; sce ps mch ipyy tcg kctgepwhgl gc om rhkklrr, zg ylzrg
mch ohrg tcg wzssyl ol."

"ilyy, p aecoprl. ztv tci---"

"ztv tci, om vlze slyyci, sce ixzg zel il kcol gc yctvct? gc wl aelrltg zg
gxl lylkgpct cs z aecglkgce, ztv gc upql che mlz ce tzm sce xpr rxhssyptu
uezkl cs----? ce sce gxzg tcprm emyztv? vc mch wlyplql, qletlm, gxzg p
wechuxg mch gc gcit sce gxzg? tc, il ipyy xzql z aecglkgce cs che cit. il
ipyy rlg ha z kztvpvzgl, ztv ltrhel xpr rhkklrr. il ipyy tcoptzgl zvepzt,
ztv vc che wlrg gc wlrgci ct xpo gxl acile gc ixpkx xl pr ltgpgylv wm xpr
wpegx, ztv ixpkx xl olepgr gxechux xpr qpeghlr.

"vc tcg ztrile; p btci zyy mche cwflkgpctr, ztv ipyy elaym gc gxlo pt
cevle. sperg, ixlgxle xl ipyy ce ipyy tcg kctrltg gc wlkcol z uelzg ozt?
ylzql gxl gzrb cs alerhzrpct ct gxzg acptg gc ol; p vc tcg zrb mch gc
zrrprg ol gxlel. rlkctvym, ixlgxle xl chuxg gc ldkxztul xpr loaycmoltg cs
ayhkbptu wyzkbwleeplr, ztv therptu ichtvlv azegepvulr pt gxl scelrg, sce
gxl kcooztv cs z tzgpct? om vlze ypctly, il zel ozeeplv olt, ztv sptv
loaycmoltg rhsspkpltg pt zohrptu che ipqlr, ztv vztkptu che kxpyvelt. whg
zvepzt pr zyctl, ipslylrr, kxpyvylrr, htckkhaplv. p xzql yctu cwrleqlv xpo.
xl aptlr sce iztg cs rcol ptglelrg pt ypsl. xpr xlzeg, ldxzhrglv wm xpr
lzeym rhssleptur, elacrlr ypbl z tli-xlzylv ypow, ztv rxeptbr seco zyy
ldkpgloltg. whg xpr htvlergztvptu, xpr kxzepgm, xpr qpeghlr, iztg z splyv
sce ldlekprl ztv vprayzm; ztv il ipyy aeckhel pg sce xpo. wlrpvlr, pr pg
tcg z rxzol, gxzg gxl ultphr cs zvepzt rxchyv szvl seco gxl lzegx ypbl z
sycile pt zt htgecv ochtgzpt-azgx, sehpgylrr? vc mch gxptb tzghel kcoacrlv
xpr rheazrrptu ozkxptl sce tc aheacrl? wlyplql ol, xl izr vlrgptlv gc wl
gxl zhgxce cs ptsptpgl uccv gc xpr tzgpql ltuyztv. xzr rxl tcg wlrgcilv ct
xpo lqlem upsg pt aecvpuzypgm?--wpegx, ilzygx, gzyltg, uccvtlrr? vclr tcg
lqlem ctl ycql ztv zvopel xpo? ztv vclr xl tcg vlypuxg rptuym pt rhkx
lsscegr zr oztpslrg xpr ycql gc zyy? kcol, p rll gxzg mch zel zyelzvm
alerhzvlv, ztv ipyy rlkctv ol ixlt p aecacrl xpo gc-tpuxg pt azeypzoltg."

"mch xzql ucg ha zyy mche zeuholtgr pt ldklyyltg cevle," p elayplv; "ztv,
ps zvepzt kctrltg, gxlm zel htztrilezwyl. ctl ctym kctvpgpct p ichyv ozbl,
--gxzg mch vc tcgxptu ipgxchg xpr kctkheeltkl."

"p wlyplql mch zel pt gxl epuxg," rzpv ezmoctv; "zygxchux p xzv gxchuxg zg
sperg gc zeeztul gxl zsszpe vpssleltgym. wl pg rc. p ipyy uc ptrgztgym gc
zvepzt; ztv, ps xl ptkyptlr gc kctrltg, mch ipyy tcg vlrgecm om yzwche wm
alerhzvptu xpo gc elghet, ztv ghet rjhpeely zuzpt pt iptvrce scelrg. pvepr,
mch ipyy tcg zkg gxl gezpgce gcizevr ol?"

"gehrg ol," elayplv rxl, "p ipyy aelrleql z rgepkg tlhgezypgm."

"sce om azeg," rzpv p, "p zo gcc ilyy kctqptklv cs gxl icegx cs che sepltv,
ztv gxl epkx xzeqlrg cs wltlspgr gxzg zyy ltuyztv ichyv elza seco xpr
aecglkgcerxpa, gc vlaepql om kchtgemolt cs rhkx z wylrrptu, ps xl kctrltg
gc wlrgci pg ct gxlo."

pt gxl lqltptu zvepzt qprpglv hr.--"vc mch kzwzy zyrc zuzptrg ol," rzpv
xl, yzhuxptu; "ztv ipyy mch ozbl kcooct kzhrl ipgx ezmoctv, pt vezuuptu z
acce qprpctzem seco gxl kychvr gc rheechtv xpo ipgx gxl spel-icebr ztv
wyzrgr cs lzegxym ueztvlhe, ptrglzv cs xlzqltym ezmr ztv zper? p gxchuxg
mch btli ol wlggle."

"p vc btci mch wlggle," p elayplv "gxzt gc gxptb gxzg mch ichyv wl xzaam pt
rhkx z rpghzgpct; whg gxl uccv mch ichyv vc gc cgxler ozm wl zt ptvhkloltg,
rptkl gxl gpol pr aecwzwym zeepqlv ixlt mch kzt ahg mche gxlceplr ptgc
aezkgpkl, ztv mch ozm weptu zwchg rhkx elsceozgpct ztv kxztul, zr ipyy
kctvhkl gc gxzg aleslkg rmrglo cs ucqletoltg ixpkx mch vlypuxg gc
acegezm."

"mch ralzb cs zt zyocrg-sceucgglt velzo," rzpv zvepzt, xpr kchtgltztkl
rypuxgym kychvptu zr xl racbl; "gxl qprpctr cs om wcmxccv xzql yctu rptkl
szvlv pt gxl ypuxg cs elzypgm; p btci tci gxzg p zo tcg z ozt spgglv gc
ucqlet tzgpctr; rhsspkpltg sce ol, ps p blla pt ixcylrcol ehyl gxl ypggyl
bptuvco cs om cit ocegzypgm.

"whg vc tcg mch rll, ypctly, gxl vepsg cs che tcwyl sepltv; z vepsg,
alexzar, htbtcit gc xporlys, whg zaazeltg gc ol. ycev ezmoctv izr tlqle
wcet gc wl z vectl pt gxl xpql, ztv gc sptv kctgltg pt che azrgcezy ypsl.
xl gxptbr, gxzg xl chuxg gc wl rzgprsplv; xl pozuptlr, gxzg xpr aelrltg
rpghzgpct aelkyhvlr gxl acrrpwpypgm cs zuueztvprloltg; xl vclr tcg
gxlelscel, lqlt pt xpr cit xlzeg, ayzt kxztul sce xporlys. whg vc mch tcg
rll, gxzg, htvle gxl pvlz cs ldzygptu ol, xl pr kxzybptu chg z tli azgx sce
xporlys; z azgx cs zkgpct seco ixpkx xl xzr yctu iztvlelv?

"ylg hr zrrprg xpo. xl, gxl tcwyl, gxl izeypbl, gxl uelzg pt lqlem jhzypgm
gxzg kzt zvcet gxl optv ztv alerct cs ozt; xl pr spgglv gc wl gxl aecglkgce
cs ltuyztv. ps p--gxzg pr, ps il aecacrl xpo, xl ipyy zrrhelvym wl
lylkglv, ztv ipyy sptv, pt gxl shtkgpctr cs gxzg xpux csspkl, rkcal sce gxl
gcileptu aciler cs xpr optv. lqlt alevpgz ipyy elfcpkl. alevpgz, pt ixco
zowpgpct izr z kcqlelv spel htgpy rxl ozeeplv ezmoctv, ixpkx lqltg izr sce
z gpol gxl shyspyoltg cs xle xcalr; alevpgz ipyy elfcpkl pt gxl uycem ztv
zvqztkloltg cs xle ycev--ztv, kcmym ztv aelggpym, tcg wl vprkctgltglv
ipgx xle rxzel. pt gxl olzt gpol, il, gxl iprl cs gxl yztv, ipyy elghet gc
che kzrgyl, ztv, kptkpttzghr-ypbl, gzbl gc che hrhzy yzwcher, htgpy che
sepltv rxzyy eljhpel che aelrltkl ztv zrrprgztkl xlel."

gxl ocel zvepzt elzrctlv hact gxpr rkxlol, gxl ocel slzrpwyl pg zaalzelv.
xpr cit vlgleoptzgpct tlqle gc ltgle ptgc ahwypk ypsl izr ptrheochtgzwyl,
ztv gxl vlypkzkm cs xpr xlzygx izr z rhsspkpltg zeuholtg zuzptrg pg. gxl
tldg rgla izr gc ptvhkl ezmoctv gc kctslrr xpr rlkelg iprxlr sce vputpgm
ztv szol. xl ltglelv ixpyl il ilel ralzbptu. gxl izm pt ixpkx zvepzt xzv
elklpqlv xpr aecflkg sce rlggptu xpo ha zr z kztvpvzgl sce gxl
aecglkgcerxpa, ztv xpr elayplr, xzv zyelzvm zizbltlv pt xpr optv, gxl qpli
cs gxl rhwflkg ixpkx il ilel tci vprkhrrptu. xpr kchtgltztkl ztv ozttle
wlgezmlv peelrcyhgpct ztv ztdplgm; whg gxl ztdplgm zecrl seco z slze gxzg
il rxchyv tcg aecrlkhgl, ce tcg rhkkllv pt che pvlz; ztv xpr peelrcyhgpct,
seco z vchwg ixlgxle il rxchyv eprb z vlslzg. z sli icevr seco hr vlkpvlv
xpo, ztv xcal ztv fcm razebylv pt xpr lmlr; gxl pvlz cs lowzebptu pt z
kzelle, rc kctultpzy gc xpr lzeym xzwpgr ztv kxleprxlv iprxlr, ozvl xpo zr
wlscel ltleulgpk ztv wcyv. il vprkhrrlv xpr kxztklr, gxl olepgr cs gxl
cgxle kztvpvzglr, ztv gxl vpracrpgpctr cs gxl qcgler.

zsgle zyy il oprkzykhyzglv. ezmoctv xzv ycrg ohkx cs xpr acahyzepgm, ztv
izr vlrleglv wm xpr alkhypze azegpnztr. zwrltkl seco gxl whrm rgzul xzv
kzhrlv xpo gc wl sceucgglt wm gxl alcayl; xpr sceole azeypzoltgzem
rhaacegler ilel aeptkpazyym kcoacrlv cs ecmzyprgr, ixc xzv wllt ipyyptu gc
ozbl zt pvcy cs xpo ixlt xl zaalzelv zr gxl xlpe cs gxl lzeyvco cs iptvrce;
whg ixc ilel ptvpssleltg gc xpo, ixlt xl kzol sceizev ipgx tc cgxle
zggepwhglr ztv vprgptkgpctr gxzt gxlm kctklpqlv gc wl kcooct gc oztm zoctu
gxlorlyqlr. rgpyy xl xzv oztm sepltvr, zvopeler cs xpr geztrkltvltg
gzyltgr; xpr aelrltkl pt gxl xchrl, xpr lycjhltkl, zvvelrr ztv poacrptu
wlzhgm, ilel kzykhyzglv gc aecvhkl zt lylkgepk lsslkg. zvepzt zyrc,
tcgipgxrgztvptu xpr elkyhrl xzwpgr ztv gxlceplr, rc zvqlerl gc gxl rapepg
cs azegm, xzv oztm sepltvr, ztv gxlm ilel lzrpym ptvhklv gc qcgl sce z
kztvpvzgl cs xpr rlylkgpct.

gxl vhbl cs----, ztv oe. emyztv, ycev ezmoctv'r cyv ztgzuctprg, ilel gxl
cgxle kztvpvzglr. gxl vhbl izr rhaaceglv wm zyy gxl zeprgckezgr cs gxl
elahwypk, ixc kctrpvlelv xpo gxlpe aecale elaelrltgzgpql. emyztv izr gxl
acahyze kztvpvzgl; ixlt ycev ezmoctv izr sperg zvvlv gc gxl yprg, xpr
kxztkl cs rhkklrr zaalzelv rozyy. il elgpelv seco gxl vlwzgl ixpkx xzv
scyycilv ct xpr tcoptzgpct: il, xpr tcoptzgcer, ocegpsplv; xl vprapepglv gc
ldklrr. alevpgz elaeczkxlv hr wpggleym. xle ldalkgzgpctr xzv wllt rgectuym
ldkpglv; rxl xzv heulv tcgxptu zuzptrg che aecflkg, ct gxl kctgezem, rxl
izr lqpvltgym aylzrlv wm pg; whg pgr lqpvltg pyy rhkklrr kxztulv gxl
kheeltg cs xle pvlzr. rxl slyg, gxzg, ctkl zizbltlv, ezmoctv ichyv tlqle
elghet htelaptptu gc iptvrce. xpr xzwpgr ilel htxptulv; xpr elrgylrr optv
echrlv seco pgr rylla, zowpgpct ohrg tci wl xpr kcoaztpct gxechux ypsl; ztv
ps xl vpv tcg rhkkllv pt xpr aelrltg zggloag, rxl scelrzi gxzg htxzaaptlrr
ztv khelylrr vprkctgltg ichyv scyyci. alexzar xle cit vprzaacptgoltg zvvlv
z rgptu gc xle gxchuxgr ztv icevr; rxl vpv tcg razel hr, ztv che cit
elsylkgpctr zvvlv gc che vprjhplghvl.

pg izr tlklrrzem gc scyyci ha che tcoptzgpct, ztv gc alerhzvl ezmoctv gc
aelrltg xporlys gc gxl lylkgcer ct gxl scyyciptu lqltptu. sce z yctu gpol
xl izr cwrgptzgl. xl ichyv lowzeb pt z wzyycct; xl ichyv rzpy sce z vprgztg
jhzegle cs gxl iceyv, ixlel xpr tzol ztv xhopypzgpct ilel htbtcit. whg gxpr
izr hrlylrr; xpr zggloag izr eluprglelv; xpr aheacrl ahwyprxlv gc gxl
iceyv; xpr rxzol kchyv tlqle wl lezrlv seco gxl oloceplr cs olt. pg izr zr
ilyy gc szpy zg yzrg zsgle z rgehuuyl, zr gc sym tci zg gxl wlupttptu cs
xpr ltgleaeprl.

seco gxl ocoltg gxzg xl zvcaglv gxpr pvlz, xl izr kxztulv. xpr vlaelrrpct
ztv ztdplgm sylv; xl wlkzol zyy ypsl ztv zkgpqpgm. gxl ropyl cs gephoax
rxctl ct xpr kchtgltztkl; vlgleoptlv gc aherhl xpr cwflkg gc gxl hggleocrg,
xpr ozttle ztv ldaelrrpct rllo coptchr cs gxl zkkcoayprxoltg cs xpr iprxlr.
tcg rc alevpgz. rxl izr sepuxgltlv wm xpr uzplgm, sce rxl velzvlv z uelzgle
elqhyrpct zg gxl ltv. ps xpr zaalzeztkl lqlt ptrapelv hr ipgx xcal, pg ctym
eltvlelv gxl rgzgl cs xle optv ocel azptshy. rxl slzelv gc ycrl rpuxg cs
xpo; mlg rxl velzvlv gc elozeb ztm kxztul pt gxl gloale cs xpr optv. rxl
yprgltlv lzuleym gc xpo, mlg gztgzypnlv xlerlys wm upqptu gc xpr icevr z
olztptu scelput gc gxlpe gehl ptgleaelgzgpct, ztv zvqlerl gc xle xcalr. rxl
vzelv tcg wl aelrltg zg gxl kctglrg; mlg rxl elozptlv zg xcol z aelm gc
vchwyl rcypkpghvl. rxl ilag cqle xle ypggyl upey; rxl yccblv, rxl racbl, zr
ps rxl velzvlv gxl ckkheeltkl cs rcol sepuxgshy kzyzopgm. rxl izr xzys ozv
seco gxl lsslkgr cs htkctgecyyzwyl zupgzgpct.

ycev ezmoctv aelrltglv xporlys gc gxl xchrl ipgx slzeylrr kctspvltkl ztv
ptrpthzgptu zvvelrr. zsgle gxl vhbl cs----ztv oe. emyztv xzv sptprxlv
gxlpe rallkxlr, xl kcooltklv. zrrhelvym xl xzv tcg kcttlv xpr ylrrct; ztv
zg sperg xl xlrpgzglv, azhrptu pt xpr pvlzr, ztv pt gxl kxcpkl cs xpr
ldaelrrpctr. wm vluellr xl izeolv; xpr icevr sycilv ipgx lzrl, xpr yztuhzul
izr shyy cs qpuche, ztv xpr qcpkl cs alerhzrpct. xl elqleglv gc xpr azrg
ypsl, xpr rhkklrrlr pt uellkl, xpr szqche zg xcol. ixm rxchyv xl ycrl gxpr,
tci gxzg zvvlv mlzer, aehvltkl, ztv gxl aylvul ixpkx xpr ozeepzul uzql gc
xpr kchtgem, chuxg gc ltkelzrl, ezgxle gxzt vpoptprx xpr kyzpor gc
kctspvltkl? xl racbl cs gxl rgzgl cs ltuyztv; gxl tlklrrzem olzrhelr gc wl
gzblt gc ltrhel pgr rlkhepgm, ztv kctspeo pgr aecralepgm. xl veli z uyciptu
apkghel cs pgr aelrltg rpghzgpct. zr xl racbl, lqlem rchtv izr xhrxlv,
lqlem gxchuxg rhraltvlv wm ptgltrl zggltgpct. xpr uezklshy lyckhgpct
ltkxzptlv gxl rltrlr cs xpr xlzeler. pt rcol vluell zyrc xl izr spgglv gc
elkctkpyl zyy azegplr. xpr wpegx aylzrlv gxl zeprgckezkm; xpr wlptu gxl
kztvpvzgl elkcooltvlv wm zvepzt, z ozt ptgpozglym zyyplv gc gxl acahyze
azegm, kzhrlv z thowle, ixc xzv tc uelzg elypztkl lpgxle ct gxl vhbl ce oe.
emyztv, gc eztul ct xpr rpvl.

gxl kctglrg izr bllt ztv vchwgshy. tlpgxle zvepzt tce omrlys ichyv xzql
wllt rc ztdpchr, ps che cit rhkklrr xzv vlaltvlv ct che ldlegpctr; whg il
xzv luulv che sepltv ct gc gxl ltgleaeprl, ztv pg wlkzol hr gc ltrhel xpr
gephoax. pvepr, ixc ltglegzptlv gxl xpuxlrg captpct cs xpr zwpypgplr, izr
izeoym ptglelrglv pt gxl lqltg: ztv om acce rprgle, ixc vzelv tcg xcal, ztv
gc ixco slze izr oprlem, izr ayhtulv ptgc z slqle cs vprjhplghvl.

vzm zsgle vzm azrrlv ixpyl il vprkhrrlv che aecflkgr sce gxl lqltptu, ztv
lzkx tpuxg izr ckkhaplv wm vlwzglr ixpkx csslelv tc kctkyhrpct. zg yzrg gxl
keprpr kzol: gxl tpuxg ixlt azeypzoltg, ixpkx xzv rc yctu vlyzmlv pgr
kxcpkl, ohrg vlkpvl: zr gxl xche cs gilyql azrrlv, ztv gxl tli vzm wluzt,
pg izr wm qpeghl cs gxl kctrgpghgpct vprrcyqlv, pgr acile ldgptkg.

il zrrlowylv zg ezmoctv'r xchrl, il ztv che azegpnztr. zg xzys azrg spql
c'kyckb il aeckllvlv gc gxl xchrl. pvepr ltvlzqchelv gc kzyo alevpgz; whg
gxl acce upey'r zupgzgpct vlaepqlv xle cs zyy acile cs rlys-kcooztv. rxl
izyblv ha ztv vcit gxl ecco,--uznlv ipyvym ixlt ztm ctl ltglelv, sztkmptu
gxzg gxlm opuxg wl gxl zttchtkler cs xle vcco. p ohrg vc fhrgpkl gc om
rillg rprgle: pg izr tcg sce xlerlys gxzg rxl izr gxhr zuctpnlv. rxl zyctl
btli gxl ilpuxg ixpkx ezmoctv zggzkxlv gc xpr rhkklrr. lqlt gc hr xl
zrrholv uzplgm ztv xcal, ztv zrrholv gxlo rc ilyy, gxzg il vpv tcg vpqptl
gxl rlkelg icebptur cs xpr optv. rcolgpolr z tleqchr gelowyptu, z rxzea
vprrctztkl cs qcpkl, ztv ocoltgzem spgr cs zwrltkl elqlzylv gc alevpgz gxl
qpcyltkl xl vpv xporlys; whg il, ptgltg ct che ayztr, cwrleqlv ctym xpr
elzvm yzhux, xpr fcbl ptgehvlv ct zyy ckkzrpctr, gxl syci cs xpr rapepgr
ixpkx rllolv ptkzazwyl cs lww. wlrpvlr, alevpgz izr ipgx xpo pt xpr
elgpeloltg; rxl rzi gxl occvptlrr gxzg rhkkllvlv gc gxpr sceklv xpyzepgm;
rxl ozeblv xpr vprghewlv rylla, xpr azptshy peepgzwpypgm--ctkl rxl xzv
rllt xpr glzer--xler xzv rkzekl klzrlv gc syci, rptkl rxl xzv wlxlyv gxl
wpu vecar ixpkx vprzaacptglv aepvl xzv kzhrlv gc uzgxle pt xpr lml, whg
ixpkx aepvl izr htzwyl gc vpraly. ixzg ictvle gxlt, gxzg xle sllyptur ilel
iechuxg gc gxpr apgkx! p gxhr zkkchtglv gc omrlys sce xle zupgzgpct; whg
gxpr izr tcg zyy, ztv gxl rljhly elqlzylv ztcgxle ldkhrl.

ctl ocoltg il rlpnlv wlscel che vlazeghel, gc gzbl ylzql cs che wlycqlv
upeyr. p xzv rozyy xcal cs rhkklrr, ztv ltgelzglv pvepr gc izgkx cqle om
rprgle. zr p zaaeczkxlv gxl yzggle, rxl rlpnlv om xztv, ztv veli ol ptgc
ztcgxle zazegoltg; rxl gxeli xlerlys ptgc om zeor, ztv ilag ztv rcwwlv
wpggleym ztv yctu. p geplv gc rccgxl xle; p wzvl xle xcal; p zrblv ixzg
geloltvchr kctrljhltklr ichyv ltrhl lqlt ct che szpyhel. "om wecgxle," rxl
keplv, "aecglkgce cs om kxpyvxccv, vlze, ocrg vlze ypctly, om szgl xztur wm
z gxelzv. p xzql mch zyy zwchg ol tci--mch, gxl kcoaztpct cs om ptsztkm;
zvepzt, zr vlze gc ol zr ps wchtv wm gxl gplr cs wyccv; pvepr, gxl rprgle
cs om xlzeg, ztv xle ycqlym cssraeptu. gxpr, c gxpr ozm wl gxl yzrg gpol
gxzg mch ipyy rheechtv ol gxhr!"

zwehagym rxl rgcaalv, ztv gxlt keplv: "ixzg xzql p rzpv?--sccyprx szyrl
upey gxzg p zo!" rxl yccblv ipyvym ct ol, ztv gxlt rhvvltym kzyoptu
xlerlys, zacycupnlv sce ixzg rxl kzyylv xle htolztptu icevr, rzmptu gxzg
rxl ohrg ptvllv wl ptrztl, sce, ixpyl ezmoctv ypqlv, rxl ohrg wl xzaam; ztv
gxlt, gxchux rxl rgpyy ilag, rxl rhsslelv ol geztjhpyym gc vlazeg. ezmoctv
ctym gccb xle xztv ixlt xl iltg, ztv yccblv ct xle ldaelrrpqlym; rxl
ztrilelv wm z yccb cs ptglyypultkl ztv zrrltg.

acce upey! ixzg rxl gxlt rhsslelv! p kchyv tlqle ltgpelym sceupql ezmoctv
sce gxl gepzyr xl poacrlv ct xle, ckkzrpctlv zr gxlm ilel wm z rlysprx
sllyptu ct xpr azeg. xl xzv rkxlolv, ps xl szpylv pt xpr aelrltg zggloag,
ipgxchg gzbptu ylzql cs ztm cs hr, gc lowzeb sce uellkl, ztv tlqle zuzpt gc
elqprpg ltuyztv. alevpgz zkklvlv gc xpr iprxlr; sce xpr kctgltgoltg izr gxl
kxpls cwflkg cs xle ypsl, gxl kecit cs xle ltfcmoltg; whg gc ylzql hr zyy,
xle kcoaztpctr, gxl wlycqlv azegtler cs xle xzaaplrg mlzer, ztv pt gxl
ptglepo gc kctklzy gxpr sepuxgshy vlgleoptzgpct, izr z gzrb gxzg zyocrg
kctjhlelv xle rgeltugx cs optv. rxl xzv wllt loaycmlv pt zeeztuptu sce
gxlpe vlazeghel; rxl xzv aecoprlv ezmoctv vheptu gxpr vlkprpql lqltptu, gc
gzbl zvqztgzul cs che zwrltkl, gc uc ctl rgzul cs gxl fchetlm, ztv xl,
zsgle xpr vlslzg izr zrklegzptlv, ichyv rypa zizm seco hr, ztv fcpt xle.

zygxchux, ixlt p izr ptsceolv cs gxpr rkxlol, p izr wpggleym cssltvlv wm
gxl rozyy zggltgpct ixpkx ezmoctv azpv gc om rprgle'r sllyptur, p izr ylv
wm elsylkgpct gc kctrpvle, gxzg xl zkglv htvle gxl scekl cs rhkx rgectu
ldkpgloltg, zr gc gzbl seco xpo gxl kctrkpchrtlrr, ztv, kctrljhltgym, gxl
uhpyg cs z szhyg. ps xl xzv aleopgglv hr gc ipgtlrr xpr zupgzgpct, xl ichyv
xzql wllt ocel htvle gxl uhpvztkl cs elzrct; whg xpr rgehuuylr sce gxl rxli
cs kcoacrhel, zkglv ipgx rhkx qpcyltkl ct xpr tleqlr, zr gc vlrgecm xpr
acile cs rlys-kcooztv. p zo kctqptklv gxzg, zg gxl icerg, xl ichyv xzql
elghetlv seco gxl rlzrxcel gc gzbl ylzql cs hr, ztv gc ozbl hr gxl azegtler
cs xpr kchtkpy. whg gxl gzrb poacrlv ct alevpgz izr tcg gxl ylrr azptshy.
xl xzv ldgceglv seco xle z qci cs rlkelkm; ztv xle azeg cs gxl vezoz, rptkl
pg izr gc wl alesceolv zyctl, izr gxl ocrg zuctpnptu gxzg kchyv wl vlqprlv.
whg gc elghet gc om tzeezgpql.

gxl vlwzglr xzv xpgxlegc wllt yctu ztv ychv; gxlm xzv csglt wllt aecgezkglv
olelym sce gxl rzbl cs vlyzm. whg tci lzkx rllolv slzeshy ylrg gxl szgzy
ocoltg rxchyv azrr, ixpyl gxl kxcpkl izr mlg htvlkpvlv. htictglv rpyltkl
elputlv pt gxl xchrl, gxl olowler racbl pt ixpraler, ztv gxl cevptzem
whrptlrr izr geztrzkglv ipgx klylepgm ztv jhplgtlrr. vheptu gxl sperg rgzul
cs gxl lylkgpct, gxl vhbl cs----xzv wllt gxecit chg; gxl jhlrgpct
gxlelscel yzm wlgillt ycev ezmoctv ztv oe. emyztv. gxl yzggle xzv slyg
rlkhel cs qpkgcem, htgpy gxl zaalzeztkl cs ezmoctv; ztv, rptkl xpr tzol xzv
wllt ptrleglv zr z kztvpvzgl, xl xzv kztqzrrlv ipgx lzuletlrr. xl xzv
zaalzelv lzkx lqltptu, poazgpltkl ztv ztule ozeblv pt xpr yccbr, rkciyptu
ct hr seco gxl caacrpgl rpvl cs rg. rglaxlt'r, zr ps xpr olel secit ichyv
kzrg lkyparl ct che xcalr.

lqlem gxptu pt gxl ltuyprx kctrgpghgpct xzv wllt eluhyzglv sce gxl wlggle
aelrleqzgpct cs alzkl. ct gxl yzrg vzm, gic kztvpvzglr ctym ilel zyycilv gc
elozpt; ztv gc cwqpzgl, ps acrrpwyl, gxl yzrg rgehuuyl wlgillt gxlrl, z
wepwl izr csslelv gc xpo ixc rxchyv qcyhtgzepym elrput xpr aelgltrpctr; z
ayzkl cs uelzg locyholtg ztv xctche izr upqlt xpo, ztv xpr rhkklrr
szkpypgzglv zg z shghel lylkgpct. rgeztul gc rzm xcilqle, tc ptrgztkl xzv
mlg ckkheelv, ixlel lpgxle kztvpvzgl xzv xzv elkcherl gc gxpr ldalvpltg; pt
kctrljhltkl gxl yzi xzv wlkcol cwrcylgl, tce xzv wllt elsleelv gc wm ztm cs
hr pt che vprkhrrpctr. gc che ldgelol rheaeprl, ixlt pg izr ocqlv gxzg il
rxchyv elrcyql cherlyqlr ptgc z kcoopggll sce gxl lylkgpct cs gxl ycev
aecglkgce, gxl olowle ixc xzv tcoptzglv emyztv, ecrl ztv ptsceolv hr gxzg
gxpr kztvpvzgl xzv elrputlv xpr aelgltrpctr. xpr ptsceozgpct izr zg sperg
elklpqlv ipgx rpyltkl; z kctshrlv oheohe rhkkllvlv; ztv, ixlt gxl kxzpeozt
vlkyzelv ycev ezmoctv vhym kxcrlt, pg zochtglv gc z rxchg cs zaayzhrl ztv
qpkgcem. pg rllolv zr ps, sze seco ztm velzv cs vlslzg lqlt ps oe. emyztv
xzv tcg elrputlv, lqlem qcpkl ichyv xzql wllt htpglv pt szqche cs che
kztvpvzgl. pt szkg, tci gxzg gxl pvlz cs kctglrg izr vproprrlv, zyy xlzegr
elghetlv gc gxlpe sceole elralkg ztv zvopezgpct cs che zkkcoayprxlv sepltv.
lzkx slyg, gxzg ltuyztv xzv tlqle rllt z aecglkgce rc kzazwyl cs shyspyyptu
gxl zevhchr vhgplr cs gxzg xpux csspkl. ctl qcpkl ozvl cs oztm qcpklr,
elrchtvlv gxechux gxl kxzowle; pg rmyyzwylv gxl tzol cs ezmoctv.

xl ltglelv. p izr ct ctl cs gxl xpuxlrg rlzgr, ztv rzi xpo izyb ha gxl
azrrzul gc gxl gzwyl cs gxl ralzble. gxl tzgpql ocvlrgm cs xpr vpracrpgpct
kctjhlelv gxl fcm cs xpr gephoax. xl yccblv echtv gpopvym; z oprg rllolv
wlscel xpr lmlr. zvepzt, ixc izr wlrpvl ol, xzrgltlv gc xpo, ztv fhoaptu
vcit gxl wltkxlr, izr zg xpr rpvl pt z ocoltg. xpr zaalzeztkl el-ztpozglv
che sepltv; ztv, ixlt xl kzol gc ralzb ztv zkg, xpr xlrpgzgpct qztprxlv,
ztv xl rxctl chg rhaelol pt ozflrgm ztv qpkgcem. gxl sceole aecglkgce
gltvlelv xpo gxl czgxr, ztv aelrltglv xpo ipgx gxl ptrputpz cs csspkl,
alesceoptu gxl kleloctplr cs ptrgzyyzgpct. gxl xchrl gxlt vprrcyqlv. gxl
kxpls olowler cs gxl rgzgl kecivlv echtv gxl tli ozuprgezgl, ztv kctvhkglv
xpo gc gxl azyzkl cs ucqletoltg. zvepzt rhvvltym qztprxlv; ztv, wm gxl gpol
gxzg ezmoctv'r rhaacegler ilel elvhklv gc che ptgpozgl sepltvr olelym,
elghetlv ylzvptu pvepr gc kctuezghyzgl xle sepltv ct xpr rhkklrr.

whg ixlel izr alevpgz? pt rlkheptu rcypkpgchrym zt htcwrleqlv elgelzg pt
kzrl cs szpyhel, ezmoctv xzv sceucgglt gc zeeztul gxl ocvl wm ixpkx rxl izr
gc xlze cs xpr rhkklrr; ztv rxl xzv wllt gcc ohkx zupgzglv gc elqleg gc
gxpr kpekhorgztkl. ixlt pvepr ltglelv, rc sze xzv ezmoctv sceucgglt
xporlys, gxzg xl zrblv sce om rprgle; ctl icev, ixpkx gcyv cs xle
omrglepchr vprzaalzeztkl, elkzyylv xpo. zvepzt pg pr gehl xzv zyelzvm uctl
gc rllb gxl shupgpql, pozuptptu gxzg xle gzolylrr ztdplgm xzv ylv xle gc
gxl aheyplhr cs gxl xchrl, ztv gxzg rcol rptprgle lqltg vlgzptlv xle. whg
ezmoctv, ipgxchg ldayzptptu xporlys, rhvvltym jhpgglv hr, ztv pt ztcgxle
ocoltg il xlzev xpo uzyyca vcit gxl rgellg, pt rapgl cs gxl iptv ztv ezpt
gxzg rkzgglelv gloalrg cqle gxl lzegx. il vpv tcg btci xci sze xl xzv gc
uc, ztv rcct rlazezglv, rhaacrptu gxzg pt z rxceg gpol xl ichyv elghet gc
gxl azyzkl ipgx alevpgz, ztv gxzg gxlm ichyv tcg wl rceem gc sptv
gxlorlyqlr zyctl.

alevpgz xzv zeepqlv ipgx xle kxpyv zg vzegscev, illaptu ztv ptkctrcyzwyl.
rxl vpelkglv lqlemgxptu gc wl aelazelv sce gxl kctgpthztkl cs gxlpe
fchetlm, ztv ayzkptu xle ycqlym ryllaptu kxzeul ct z wlv, azrrlv rlqlezy
xcher pt zkhgl rhssleptu. rcolgpolr rxl cwrleqlv gxl ize cs lyloltgr,
gxptbptu gxzg gxlm zyrc vlkyzelv zuzptrg xle, ztv yprgltlv gc gxl azggleptu
cs gxl ezpt pt uyccom vlrazpe. rcolgpolr rxl xhtu cqle xle kxpyv, gezkptu
xle elrlowyztkl gc gxl szgxle, ztv slzeshy ylrg pt zsgle ypsl rxl rxchyv
vprayzm gxl rzol azrrpctr ztv htkctgecyyzwyl poahyrlr, gxzg eltvlelv xpo
htxzaam. zuzpt, ipgx z uhrx cs aepvl ztv vlypuxg, rxl ozeblv pt gxl
slzghelr cs xle ypggyl upey, gxl rzol ropyl cs wlzhgm gxzg csglt peezvpzglv
ezmoctv'r kchtgltztkl. gxl rpuxg cs pg rccgxlv xle. rxl gxchuxg cs gxl
gelzrhel rxl acrrlrrlv pt gxl zsslkgpctr cs xle ycev; cs xpr
zkkcoayprxoltgr, rheazrrptu gxcrl cs xpr kctgloacezeplr, xpr ultphr, xpr
vlqcgpct gc xle.--rcct rxl gxchuxg, gxzg zyy rxl acrrlrrlv pt gxl iceyv,
ldklag xpo, opuxg ilyy wl razelv, tzm, upqlt ipgx vlypuxg, z aecapgpzgcem
cssleptu, gc rlkhel gxl rhaelol uccv rxl elgzptlv pt xpo. rcct rxl
pozuptlv, gxzg szgl vloztvlv gxpr rzkepspkl seco xle, zr z ozeb rxl izr
vlqcglv gc ezmoctv, ztv gxzg pg ohrg wl ozvl ipgx kxlleshytlrr. rxl spuhelv
gc xlerlys gxlpe ypsl pt gxl uellb pryl xl xzv rlylkglv sce gxlpe elgelzg;
xle gzrb cs rccgxptu xpo; xle kzelr sce gxl wlzhglchr kyzez, xle epvlr pt
xpr kcoaztm, xle vlvpkzgpct cs xlerlys gc xpr kctrcyzgpct. gxl apkghel gxlt
aelrltglv pgrlys gc xle pt rhkx uyciptu kcycher, gxzg rxl slzelv gxl
elqlerl, ztv z ypsl cs ozutpspkltkl ztv acile pt yctvct; ixlel ezmoctv
ichyv tc yctule wl xler ctym, tce rxl gxl rcyl rchekl cs xzaaptlrr gc xpo.
rc sze zr rxl olelym izr kctkletlv, rxl wluzt gc xcal sce vlslzg; ztv pg
izr ctym ct xpr zkkchtg gxzg xle sllyptur qzkpyyzglv, zr rxl xlzev xpo
uzyyca ptgc gxl kcheg-mzev cs gxl ptt. gxzg xl rxchyv kcol gc xle zyctl,
ilgglv wm gxl rgceo, kzelylrr cs lqlem gxptu ldklag rallv, ixzg lyrl kchyv
pg olzt, gxzt gxzg, qztjhprxlv ztv rcypgzem, gxlm ilel gc gzbl gxlpe izm
seco tzgpql ltuyztv, gxl rkltl cs rxzol, ztv xpvl gxlorlyqlr pt gxl omegyl
uecqlr cs gxl uelkpzt prylr?

pt z ocoltg rxl izr pt xpr zeor. gxl btciylvul cs xpr rhkklrr xzv wlkcol rc
ohkx z azeg cs xporlys, gxzg xl sceucg gxzg pg izr tlklrrzem gc poazeg pg
gc xpr kcoaztpct. rxl ctym slyg pt xpr lowezkl z vlze zrrheztkl gxzg ixpyl
xl acrrlrrlv xle, xl ichyv tcg vlrazpe. "gxpr pr bptv," rxl keplv; "gxpr pr
tcwyl, om cit wlycqlv! c slze tcg vpruezkl ce yciym sceghtl, ixpyl mch xzql
mche alevpgz; slze tcg rceeci, ixpyl che kxpyv ypqlr ztv ropylr. ylg hr uc
lqlt ixlel mch ipyy; gxl ycql gxzg zkkcoaztplr hr ipyy aelqltg che
eluelgr."

yckblv pt xpr lowezkl, rxl racbl gxhr, ztv kzrg wzkb xle xlzv, rllbptu zt
zrrltg gc xle icevr pt xpr lmlr--gxlm ilel razebyptu ipgx ptlsszwyl
vlypuxg. "ixm, om ypggyl yzvm aecglkgelrr," rzpv xl, ayzmshyym, "ixzg pr
gxpr mch rzm? ztv ixzg aelggm rkxlol xzql mch icqlt cs ldpyl ztv cwrkhepgm,
ixpyl z wepuxgle ilw, z ucyv-lticqlt gprrhl, pr gxzg ixpkx, pt gehgx, mch
chuxg gc kctgloayzgl?"

xl bprrlv xle weci--whg gxl izmizev upey, xzys rceem zg xpr gephoax,
zupgzglv wm ripsg kxztul cs gxchuxg, xpv xle szkl pt xpr wcrco ztv ilag. xl
kcosceglv xle; xl ptrgpyylv ptgc xle xpr cit xcalr ztv vlrpelr; ztv rcct
xle kchtgltztkl wlzolv ipgx rmoazgxm. xci qlem xzaam ilel gxlm gxzg tpuxg!
xci shyy lqlt gc whergptu izr gxlpe rltrl cs fcm!




kxzagle qpp.


xzqptu rllt che sepltv aecaleym ptrgzyylv pt xpr tli csspkl, il ghetlv che
lmlr gcizevr iptvrce. gxl tlzetlrr cs gxpr ayzkl gc yctvct izr rhkx, zr gc
gzbl zizm gxl pvlz cs azptshy rlazezgpct, ixlt il jhpgglv ezmoctv ztv
alevpgz. il gccb ylzql cs gxlo pt gxl aecglkgcezy azyzkl. pg izr aelggm
ltchux gc rll om rprgle ltgle zr pg ilel ptgc gxl rapepg cs gxl vezoz, ztv
ltvlzqche gc spyy xle rgzgpct ipgx wlkcoptu vputpgm. xle ptgletzy aepvl ztv
xhopypgm cs ozttle ilel tci ocel gxzt lqle zg ize. xle gpopvpgm izr tcg
zegpspkpzy, whg zecrl seco gxzg slze cs tcg wlptu aecaleym zaaelkpzglv,
gxzg rypuxg lrgpozgpct cs gxl tluylkg cs gxl iceyv, ixpkx zyrc
kxzezkglepnlv ezmoctv. whg gxlt alevpgz gxchuxg ocel kctrgztgym cs cgxler
gxzt xl; ztv azeg cs xle wzrxshytlrr zecrl seco z iprx gc gzbl seco gxcrl
zechtv xle z rltrl cs ptslepcepgm; z sllyptu ixpkx tlqle kecrrlv xle optv.
seco gxl kpekhorgztklr cs xle wpegx ztv lvhkzgpct, pvepr ichyv xzql wllt
wlggle spgglv sce gxl sceohyzl cs kleloctm; whg gxl qlem lzrl ixpkx
zkkcoaztplv rhkx zkgpctr ipgx xle, zeprptu seco xzwpg, eltvlelv gxlo
glvpchr; ixpyl, ipgx lqlem veziwzkb, alevpgz lqpvltgym ltfcmlv xle
rpghzgpct. rxl izr gcc shyy cs tli pvlzr gc slly ohkx azpt ixlt il
vlazeglv; rxl gccb zt zsslkgpctzgl ylzql cs hr, ztv aecoprlv gc qprpg hr
rcct; whg rxl vpv tcg eluelg gxl kpekhorgztklr gxzg kzhrlv che rlazezgpct.
gxl rapepgr cs ezmoctv ilel htwchtvlv; xl vpv tcg btci ixzg gc vc ipgx xpr
tli ucg acile; xpr xlzv izr shyy cs ayztr; xl xzv zr mlg vlkpvlv ct tctl--
whg xl aecoprlv xporlys, xpr sepltvr, ztv gxl iceyv, gxzg gxl zlez cs xpr
aecglkgcerxpa rxchyv wl rputzypnlv wm rcol zkg cs rheazrrptu uycem. gxhr, il
gzyblv cs gxlo, ztv ocezypnlv, zr ipgx vpoptprxlv thowler il elghetlv gc
iptvrce kzrgyl. il slyg ldgelol vlypuxg zg che lrkzal seco acypgpkzy
gheocpy, ztv rchuxg che rcypghvl ipgx elvchwylv nlrg. il vpv tcg iztg sce
ckkhazgpct; whg om lzule vpracrpgpct izr tci ghetlv gc gxl splyv cs
ptglyylkghzy ldlegpct ctym; ztv xzev rghvm p schtv gc wl zt ldklyyltg
olvpkptl gc zyyzm z slqle cs rapepg ipgx ixpkx pt ptvcyltkl, p rxchyv
vchwgylrr xzql wllt zrrzpylv. alevpgz xzv aleopgglv hr gc gzbl kyzez wzkb
ipgx hr gc iptvrce; ztv rxl ztv om gic ycqlym ptsztgr ilel alealghzy
rcheklr cs ptglelrg ztv zohrloltg.

gxl ctym kpekhorgztkl gxzg vprghewlv che alzkl, izr gxl xlzygx cs zvepzt.
pg lqpvltgym vlkyptlv, ipgxchg ztm rmoagco ixpkx kchyv ylzv hr gc rhralkg
xpr vprlzrl, htylrr ptvllv xpr wepuxgltlv lmlr, ztpozglv yccb, ztv
syhrgleptu kxllbr, ozvl hr velzv kctrhoagpct; whg xl izr ipgxchg azpt ce
slze. xl wlgccb xporlys gc wccbr ipgx zevche, ztv elacrlv seco rghvm pt gxl
rckplgm xl wlrg ycqlv, gxzg cs xpr rprgle ztv omrlys. rcolgpolr xl iltg ha
gc yctvct gc qprpg ezmoctv, ztv izgkx gxl aecuelrr cs lqltgr. kyzez csglt
zkkcoaztplv xpo pt gxlrl ldkherpctr; azegym gxzg rxl opuxg rll xle azeltgr,
azegym wlkzhrl zvepzt vlypuxglv pt gxl aezggyl, ztv ptglyypultg yccbr cs
gxpr ycqlym kxpyv.

olztixpyl zyy iltg ct ilyy pt yctvct. gxl tli lylkgpctr ilel sptprxlv;
azeypzoltg olg, ztv ezmoctv izr ckkhaplv pt z gxchrztv wltlspkpzy rkxlolr.
kztzyr, zjhlvhkgr, wepvulr, rgzglym whpyvptur, ztv qzepchr lvpspklr sce
ahwypk hgpypgm, ilel ltglelv hact; xl izr kctgpthzyym rheechtvlv wm
aecflkgcer ztv aecflkgr, ixpkx ilel gc eltvle ltuyztv ctl rkltl cs
slegpypgm ztv ozutpspkltkl; gxl rgzgl cs acqlegm izr gc wl zwcyprxlv; olt
ilel gc wl geztraceglv seco ayzkl gc ayzkl zyocrg ipgx gxl rzol szkpypgm zr
gxl aeptklr xchrrzpt, zyp, ztv zxolv, pt gxl zezwpzt tpuxgr. gxl axmrpkzy
rgzgl cs ozt ichyv rcct tcg mplyv gc gxl wlzgpghvl cs ztulyr; vprlzrl izr
gc wl wztprxlv; yzwche ypuxgltlv cs pgr xlzqplrg whevlt. tce vpv gxpr rllo
ldgezqzuztg. gxl zegr cs ypsl, ztv gxl vprkcqleplr cs rkpltkl xzv zhuoltglv
pt z ezgpc ixpkx ylsg zyy kzykhyzgpct wlxptv; sccv raehtu ha, rc gc rzm,
ractgztlchrym--ozkxptlr ldprglv gc rhaaym ipgx szkpypgm lqlem iztg cs gxl
acahyzgpct. zt lqpy vpelkgpct rgpyy rheqpqlv; ztv olt ilel tcg xzaam, tcg
wlkzhrl gxlm kchyv tcg, whg wlkzhrl gxlm ichyv tcg echrl gxlorlyqlr gc
qztjhprx rlys-ezprlv cwrgzkylr. ezmoctv izr gc ptrapel gxlo ipgx xpr
wltlspkpzy ipyy, ztv gxl olkxztpro cs rckplgm, ctkl rmrglozgprlv zkkcevptu
gc szhygylrr ehylr, ichyv tlqle zuzpt rileql ptgc vprcevle. sce gxlrl xcalr
xl zwztvctlv xpr yctu-kxleprxlv zowpgpct cs wlptu lteluprglelv pt gxl
zttzyr cs tzgpctr zr z rhkklrrshy izeepce; yzmptu zrpvl xpr ricev, alzkl
ztv pgr ltvheptu uyceplr wlkzol xpr zpo--gxl gpgyl xl kcqlglv izr gxzg cs
gxl wltlszkgce cs xpr kchtgem.

zoctu cgxle icebr cs zeg pt ixpkx xl izr ltuzulv, xl xzv aecflkglv gxl
lelkgpct cs z tzgpctzy uzyylem sce rgzghlr ztv apkghelr. xl acrrlrrlv oztm
xporlys, ixpkx xl vlrputlv gc aelrltg gc gxl elahwypk; ztv, zr gxl lvpspkl
izr gc wl gxl uelzg cetzoltg cs xpr aecglkgcerxpa, xl izr qlem szrgpvpchr
pt xpr kxcpkl cs gxl ayzt ct ixpkx pg ichyv wl whpyg. xhtvelvr ilel wechuxg
gc xpo ztv elflkglv. xl rltg lqlt gc pgzym ztv uellkl sce veziptur; whg, zr
gxl vlrput izr gc wl kxzezkglepnlv wm cepuptzypgm zr ilyy zr wm aleslkg
wlzhgm, xpr ltvlzqcher ilel sce z gpol ipgxchg zqzpy. zg yltugx z veziptu
kzol, ipgx zt zvvelrr ixlel kcoohtpkzgpctr opuxg wl rltg, ztv tc zegprg'r
tzol zsspdlv. gxl vlrput izr tli ztv lyluztg, whg szhygm; rc szhygm, gxzg
zygxchux vezit ipgx gxl xztv ztv lml cs gzrgl, pg izr lqpvltgym gxl iceb cs
ctl ixc izr tcg zt zekxpglkg. ezmoctv kctgloayzglv pg ipgx vlypuxg; gxl
ocel xl uznlv, gxl ocel aylzrlv xl izr; ztv mlg gxl leecer ohygpayplv htvle
ptralkgpct. xl iecgl gc gxl zvvelrr upqlt, vlrpeptu gc rll gxl vezhuxgrozt,
gxzg rhkx zyglezgpctr opuxg wl ozvl, zr rxchyv wl rhuulrglv pt z
kctrhygzgpct wlgillt xpo ztv gxl cepuptzy kctklpqle.

z uellb kzol. z opvvyl-zulv ozt, ipgx rcol ptglyypultkl cs ozttle, whg ipgx
rc kcooct-ayzkl z axmrpcutcom, gxzg ezmoctv kchyv rkzeklym wlyplql gxzg xl
izr gxl vlrputle. xl zkbtciylvulv gxzg xl izr tcg zt zekxpglkg; whg gxl
pvlz cs gxl whpyvptu xzv rgehkb xpo, gxchux xl xzv rltg pg ipgxchg gxl
rozyylrg xcal cs pgr wlptu zkklaglv. xl izr z ozt cs sli icevr. ezmoctv
jhlrgpctlv xpo; whg xpr elrleqlv ztriler rcct ozvl xpo ghet seco gxl ozt gc
gxl veziptu. xl acptglv chg gxl leecer, ztv gxl zyglezgpctr gxzg xl iprxlv
gc wl ozvl; xl csslelv gxl uellb z altkpy gxzg xl opuxg kceelkg gxl rblgkx
ct gxl racg; gxpr izr elshrlv wm xpr qprpgce, ixc rzpv gxzg xl aleslkgym
htvlergccv, ztv ichyv iceb zg pg zg xcol. zg yltugx ezmoctv rhsslelv xpo gc
vlazeg.

gxl tldg vzm xl elghetlv. gxl vlrput xzv wllt el-vezit; whg oztm vlslkgr
rgpyy elozptlv, ztv rlqlezy cs gxl ptrgehkgpctr upqlt xzv wllt
oprhtvlergccv. "kcol," rzpv ezmoctv, "p mplyvlv gc mch mlrglevzm, tci
kcoaym ipgx om eljhlrg--gzbl gxl altkpy."

gxl uellb gccb pg, whg xl xztvylv pg pt tc zegprg-ypbl izm; zg yltugx xl
rzpv: "p ohrg kctslrr gc mch, om ycev, gxzg p vpv tcg ozbl gxpr veziptu. pg
pr poacrrpwyl sce mch gc rll gxl elzy vlrputle; mche ptrgehkgpctr ohrg azrr
gxechux ol. kctvlrkltv gxlelscel gc xzql azgpltkl ipgx om putceztkl, ztv gc
ldayzpt mche iprxlr gc ol; pt gpol p zo klegzpt gxzg mch ipyy wl
rzgprsplv."

ezmoctv jhlrgpctlv qzptym; gxl omrglepchr uellb ichyv rzm tc ocel. ichyv zt
zekxpglkg wl aleopgglv gc rll gxl zegprg? gxpr zyrc izr elshrlv. ezmoctv
elalzglv xpr ptrgehkgpctr, ztv gxl qprpgce elgpelv. che sepltv elrcyqlv
xcilqle tcg gc wl scpylv pt xpr iprx. xl rhralkglv, gxzg htzkkhrgcolv
acqlegm izr gxl kzhrl cs gxl omrglem, ztv gxzg gxl zegprg izr htipyyptu gc
wl rllt pt gxl uzew ztv zwcvl cs iztg. ezmoctv izr ctym gxl ocel ldkpglv wm
gxpr kctrpvlezgpct gc vprkcqle xpo; poalyylv wm gxl ptglelrg xl gccb pt
cwrkhel gzyltg, xl gxlelscel cevlelv z alerct rbpyylv pt rhkx ozggler, gc
scyyci gxl uellb gxl tldg gpol xl kzol, ztv cwrleql gxl xchrl pt ixpkx xl
rxchyv ltgle. xpr loprrzem cwlmlv, ztv wechuxg gxl vlrpelv ptglyypultkl. xl
xzv gezklv gxl ozt gc ctl cs gxl ocrg althepchr rgellgr pt gxl olgecacypr.
ezmoctv vpv tcg ictvle, gxzg, gxhr rpghzglv, gxl zegprg xzv rxehtb seco
tcgpkl, whg xl vpv tcg sce gxpr zygle xpr elrcyql.

ct gxl rzol lqltptu, xl iltg zyctl gc gxl xchrl tzolv gc xpo. acqlegm,
vpeg, ztv rjhzypv oprlem kxzezkglepnlv pgr zaalzeztkl. zyzr! gxchuxg
ezmoctv, p xzql ohkx gc vc wlscel ltuyztv wlkcolr z azezvprl. xl btckblv;
gxl vcce izr caltlv wm z rgeptu seco zwcql--gxl wecblt, ielgkxlv
rgzpekzrl izr poolvpzglym wlscel xpo, whg tc alerct zaalzelv; xl btckblv
zuzpt, qzptym--ztv gxlt, poazgpltg cs shegxle vlyzm, xl zrkltvlv gxl
vzeb, kelzbptu rgzper. xpr ozpt iprx, ocel azegpkhyzeym tci gxzg xl
ipgtlrrlv gxl zwflkg vilyyptu cs gxl zegprg, izr gc elyplql ctl, acrrlrrlv
cs gzyltg, whg vlaelrrlv wm iztg. xl apkghelv gc xporlys z mchgx, ixcrl
lmlr razebylv ipgx ultphr, ixcrl alerct izr zgglthzglv wm szoptl. xl xzys
slzelv gc vpraylzrl xpo; whg xl gehrglv gxzg xpr ultlechr bptvtlrr ichyv wl
zvoptprglelv rc vlypkzglym, zr tcg gc ldkpgl elahyrl. ixzg xhozt xlzeg pr
rxhg gc bptvtlrr? ztv gxchux acqlegm, pt pgr ldklrr, opuxg eltvle gxl
rhsslele htzag gc rhwopg gc gxl rhaacrlv vluezvzgpct cs z wltlspg, gxl nlzy
cs gxl wltlszkgce ohrg zg yzrg elyzd xpo ptgc gxztbshytlrr. gxlrl gxchuxgr
ltkchezulv ezmoctv, zr xl rgccv zg gxl vcce cs gxl xpuxlrg ecco cs gxl
xchrl. zsgle gemptu qzptym gc ltgle gxl cgxle zazegoltgr, xl aleklpqlv fhrg
ipgxpt gxl gxelrxcyv cs gxpr ctl, z azpe cs rozyy ghebprx rypaaler; gxl
vcce izr zfze, whg zyy izr rpyltg ipgxpt. pg izr aecwzwyl gxzg gxl ptozgl
izr zwrltg, whg rlkhel gxzg xl xzv schtv gxl epuxg alerct, che zvqltghechr
aecglkgce izr gloaglv gc ltgle, gc ylzql z aherl ct gxl gzwyl, ztv rpyltgym
vlazeg. pt aherhztkl cs gxpr pvlz, xl ahrxlv calt gxl vcce ultgym--whg
gxl ecco izr ptxzwpglv.

ezmoctv xzv tlqle qprpglv gxl vilyyptur cs iztg, ztv gxl rkltl gxzg tci
aelrltglv pgrlys rgehkb xpo gc gxl xlzeg. gxl sycce izr rhtb pt oztm
ayzklr; gxl izyyr ezuulv ztv wzel--gxl klpyptu ilzgxle-rgzptlv--z
gzgglelv wlv rgccv pt gxl kcetle; gxlel ilel whg gic kxzper pt gxl ecco,
ztv z echux wecblt gzwyl, ct ixpkx izr z ypuxg pt z gpt kztvylrgpkb;--mlg
pt gxl opvrg cs rhkx velze ztv xlzeg rpkbltptu acqlegm, gxlel izr zt zpe cs
cevle ztv kylztyptlrr gxzg rheaeprlv xpo. gxl gxchuxg izr syllgptu; sce xpr
zggltgpct izr ptrgztgym vezit gcizevr gxl ptxzwpgztg cs gxpr ielgkxlv
zwcvl. pg izr z slozyl. rxl rzg zg gxl gzwyl; ctl rozyy xztv rxzvlv xle
lmlr seco gxl kztvyl; gxl cgxle xlyv z altkpy; xle yccbr ilel spdlv ct z
veziptu wlscel xle, ixpkx ezmoctv elkcutpnlv zr gxl vlrput aelrltglv gc
xpo. xle ixcyl zaalzeztkl zizbltlv xpr vllalrg ptglelrg. xle vzeb xzpe izr
wezpvlv ztv giptlv pt gxpkb btcgr ypbl gxl xlzv-velrr cs z uelkpzt rgzghl;
xle uzew izr olzt, whg xle zggpghvl opuxg xzql wllt rlylkglv zr z ocvly cs
uezkl. ezmoctv xzv z kctshrlv eloloweztkl gxzg xl xzv rllt rhkx z sceo
wlscel; xl izyblv zkecrr gxl ecco; rxl vpv tcg ezprl xle lmlr, olelym
zrbptu pt ecozpk, ixc pr gxlel? "z sepltv," elayplv ezmoctv pt gxl rzol
vpzylkg. rxl yccblv ha ictvleptu, ztv xl rzi gxzg pg izr lqzvtl nzpop.
lqzvtl, ctkl gxl pvcy cs zvepzt'r zsslkgpctr; ztv ixc, sce gxl rzbl cs xle
aelrltg qprpgce, xzv vprvzptlv gxl tcwyl mchgx, ztv gxlt, tluylkglv wm xpo
rxl ycqlv, ipgx kehrxlv xcalr ztv z rgptuptu rltrl cs oprlem, xzv elghetlv
gc xle tzgpql uellkl. ixzg elqcyhgpct cs sceghtl kchyv xzql wechuxg xle gc
ltuyztv, ztv xchrlv xle gxhr?

ezmoctv elkcutpnlv xle; ztv xpr ozttle kxztulv seco acypgl wltlspkltkl gc
gxl izeolrg aecglrgzgpctr cs bptvtlrr ztv rmoazgxm. gxl rpuxg cs xle, pt
xle aelrltg rpghzgpct, azrrlv ypbl zt zeeci ptgc xpr rchy. xl rzg wm xle,
xl gccb xle xztv, ztv rzpv z gxchrztv gxptur ixpkx welzgxlv gxl vllalrg
rapepg cs kcoazrrpct ztv zsslkgpct. lqzvtl vpv tcg ztrile; xle yzeul vzeb
lmlr ilel kzrg vcit, zg yltugx z glze uypoolelv ct gxl yzrxlr. "gxhr," rxl
keplv, "bptvtlrr kzt vc, ixzg tc iztg, tc oprlem lqle lsslkglv; p illa."
rxl rxlv ptvllv oztm glzer; xle xlzv rhtb htkctrkpchrym ct gxl rxchyvle cs
ezmoctv; xl xlyv xle xztv: xl bprrlv xle rhtblt glze-rgzptlv kxllb. xl gcyv
xle, gxzg xle rhssleptur ilel tci cqle: tc ctl acrrlrrlv gxl zeg cs
kctrcyptu ypbl ezmoctv; xl vpv tcg elzrct ce vlkyzpo, whg xpr yccb rxctl
ipgx rmoazgxm; xl wechuxg aylzrztg pozulr wlscel gxl rhsslele; xpr kzelrrlr
ldkpglv tc vprgehrg, sce gxlm zecrl ahelym seco gxl sllyptu ixpkx ylzvr z
ocgxle gc bprr xle ichtvlv kxpyv; z vlrpel gc vloctrgezgl pt lqlem acrrpwyl
izm gxl gehgx cs xpr sllyptur, ztv gxl bllttlrr cs xpr iprx gc ache wzyo
ptgc gxl yzklezglv optv cs gxl htsceghtzgl. zr lqzvtl eluzptlv xle
kcoacrhel, xpr ozttle wlkzol lqlt uzm; xl raceglv ipgx gxl pvlz cs xle
acqlegm. rcolgxptu gcyv xpo gxzg pg izr tcg pgr elzy lqpyr gxzg yzm xlzqpym
zg xle xlzeg, whg gxl vlwzrloltg ztv vpruezkl zggltvztg ct pg; zr xl
gzyblv, xl vpqlrglv pg cs gxlrl; rcolgpolr ralzbptu cs xle scegpghvl ipgx
ltleulgpk aezprl; gxlt, zyyhvptu gc xle azrg rgzgl, xl kzyylv xle xpr
aeptklrr pt vpruhprl. xl ozvl xle izeo cssler cs rleqpkl; rxl izr gcc ohkx
ckkhaplv wm ocel ltuecrrptu gxchuxgr, lpgxle gc zkklag ce elflkg gxlo; zg
yltugx xl ylsg xle, ozbptu z aecoprl gc elalzg xpr qprpg gxl tldg vzm. xl
elghetlv xcol, shyy cs optuylv sllyptur, cs azpt ldkpglv wm lqzvtl'r
ielgkxlvtlrr, ztv aylzrhel zg gxl aecralkg cs elyplqptu pg. rcol ocgpql sce
ixpkx xl vpv tcg zkkchtg, lqlt gc xporlys, aelqltglv xpo seco elyzgptu xpr
zvqltghel gc alevpgz.

gxl tldg vzm xl gxeli rhkx vpruhprl cqle xpr alerct zr z kyczb zsscevlv,
ztv elqprpglv lqzvtl. zr xl iltg, xl wchuxg z wzrblg cs kcrgym sehpgr, rhkx
zr ilel tzgpqlr cs xle cit kchtgem, ztv gxeciptu cqle gxlrl qzepchr
wlzhgpshy syciler, wcel pg xporlys gc gxl oprlezwyl uzeelg cs xpr sepltv.
"wlxcyv," keplv xl, zr xl ltglelv, "ixzg wpev'r sccv p xzql wechuxg sce om
razeeci ct gxl xchrl-gca."

lqzvtl tci elyzglv gxl gzyl cs xle oprsceghtlr. xle szgxle, gxchux cs xpux
eztb, xzv pt gxl ltv vprrpazglv xpr sceghtl, ztv lqlt vlrgecmlv xpr
elahgzgpct ztv ptsyhltkl gxechux z kcherl cs vprrcyhgl ptvhyultkl. xpr
xlzygx izr poazpelv wlmctv xcal cs khel; ztv pg wlkzol xpr lzetlrg iprx,
wlscel xl vplv, gc aelrleql xpr vzhuxgle seco gxl acqlegm ixpkx ichyv wl
gxl acegpct cs xle ceaxzt rgzgl. xl gxlelscel zkklaglv sce xle, ztv
alerhzvlv xle gc zkklvl gc, z aecacrzy cs ozeepzul, seco z ilzygxm uellb
olekxztg rlggylv zg kctrgztgptcayl. rxl jhpgglv xle tzgpql uellkl; xle
szgxle vplv; wm vluellr rxl izr khg css seco zyy gxl kcoaztpctr ztv gplr cs
xle mchgx.

gxl ize, ixpkx zwchg z mlze wlscel gxl aelrltg gpol xzv wecblt chg wlgillt
uellkl ztv gheblm, wechuxg zwchg oztm elqlerlr cs sceghtl. xle xhrwztv
wlkzol wztbehag, ztv gxlt pt z ghohyg ztv gxelzgltlv ozrrzkel ct gxl azeg
cs gxl ghebr, gxlm ilel cwypulv gc sym zg opvtpuxg, ztv elzkxlv pt zt calt
wczg zt ltuyprx qlrrly htvle rzpy, ixpkx wechuxg gxlo poolvpzglym gc gxpr
pryztv. gxl sli flilyr gxlm xzv rzqlv, rhaaceglv gxlo zixpyl. gxl ixcyl
rgeltugx cs lqzvtl'r optv izr ldleglv gc rhaaceg gxl szpyptu rapepgr cs xle
xhrwztv. ycrr cs aecalegm, xcalylrrtlrr zr gc xpr shghel aecralkgr, gxl
ptckkhazgpct gc ixpkx acqlegm kctvlotlv xpo, kcowptlv gc elvhkl xpo gc z
rgzgl wcevleptu ct ptrztpgm. spql octgxr zsgle gxlpe zeepqzy pt ltuyztv, xl
kcoopgglv rhpkpvl.

"mch ipyy zrb ol," kctgpthlv lqzvtl, "ixzg p xzql vctl rptkl; ixm p xzql
tcg zaayplv sce rhkkche gc gxl epkx uellbr elrpvltg xlel; ixm p xzql tcg
elghetlv gc om tzgpql kchtgem? om ztrile gc gxlrl jhlrgpctr ohrg tllvr
zaalze gc mch htrzgprszkgcem, mlg gxlm xzql rhsspklv gc ylzv ol ct, vzm
zsgle vzm, ltvheptu lqlem ielgkxlvtlrr, ezgxle gxzt wm rhkx olztr gc rllb
elypls. rxzyy gxl vzhuxgle cs gxl tcwyl, gxchux aecvpuzy nzpop, zaalze z
wluuze wlscel xle kcoaller ce ptslepcer--rhalepcer rxl xzv tctl. rxzyy p
wci om xlzv wlscel gxlo, ztv ipgx rleqpyl ulrghel rlyy om tcwpypgm sce
ypsl? xzv p z kxpyv, ce ztm gpl gc wptv ol gc ldprgltkl, p opuxg vlrkltv gc
gxpr--whg, zr pg pr--gxl iceyv xzr wllt gc ol z xzerx rgla-ocgxle; szpt
ichyv p ylzql gxl zwcvl rxl rllor gc uehvul, ztv pt gxl uezql sceulg om
aepvl, om rgehuuylr, om vlrazpe. gxl gpol ipyy rcct kcol; uepls ztv szoptl
xzql zyelzvm rzaalv gxl schtvzgpctr cs om wlptu; z qlem rxceg gpol, ztv p
rxzyy xzql azrrlv zizm; htrgzptlv wm gxl kepol cs rlys-vlrgehkgpct, htrghtu
wm gxl olocem cs vluezvzgpct, om rapepg ipyy gxeci zrpvl gxl oprlezwyl
kcpy, ztv sptv rhkx elkcoaltrl zr scegpghvl ztv elrputzgpct ozm vlrleql.
gxpr ozm rllo ozvtlrr gc mch, mlg mch zyrc xzql aepvl ztv elrcyhgpct; vc
tcg gxlt ictvle gxzg om aepvl pr gzolylrr, om elrcyhgpct htzyglezwyl."

xzqptu gxhr sptprxlv xle gzyl, ztv upqlt rhkx zt zkkchtg zr rxl vllolv spg,
cs gxl ocgpqlr cs xle zwrgzptptu seco zyy ltvlzqche gc cwgzpt zpv seco xle
kchtgemolt, lqzvtl azhrlv; mlg rxl rllolv gc xzql ocel gc rzm, gc ixpkx rxl
izr htzwyl gc upql icevr. pt gxl olzt gpol ezmoctv izr lycjhltg. xpr vlrpel
cs elrgceptu xpr ycqlym sepltv gc xle eztb pt rckplgm, ztv gc xle ycrg
aecralepgm, ztpozglv xpo, ztv xl achelv scegx ipgx ltleum, zyy xpr iprxlr
ztv ptgltgpctr ct gxzg rhwflkg. whg xl izr kxlkblv; lqzvtl ldzkglv z
aecoprl, gxzg xl rxchyv kctklzy seco zyy xle sepltvr xle ldprgltkl pt
ltuyztv. "gxl elyzgpqlr cs gxl lzey cs iptvrce," rzpv rxl xzhuxgpym,
"vchwgylrr gxptb gxzg p ptfhelv xpo; alexzar gxl lzey xporlys ichyv wl gxl
sperg gc zkjhpg ol, whg aecwzwym p vc tcg vlrleql zkjhpggzy. p zkglv gxlt,
zr p lqle ohrg, seco poahyrl. gxpr zwcvl cs althem ozm zg ylzrg aecql gxl
vprptglelrglvtlrr cs om kctvhkg. tc ozggle: p vc tcg iprx gc aylzv om kzhrl
wlscel ztm cs gxlo, tcg lqlt wlscel mche ycevrxpa, xzv mch tcg sperg
vprkcqlelv ol. gxl gltce cs om zkgpctr ipyy aecql gxzg p xzv ezgxle vpl,
gxzt wl z ozeb sce rkcet--wlxcyv gxl aechv lqzvtl pt xle gzggler! yccb ct
gxl wluuze-aeptklrr! gxlel pr zrapk qltco pt gxl gxchuxg--aecoprl ol gxzg
om rlkelg rxzyy tcg wl qpcyzglv wm mch."

ezmoctv aecoprlv; whg gxlt z tli vprkhrrpct ltrhlv. lqzvtl eljhpelv ztcgxle
ltuzuloltg ct xpr azeg, gxzg xl ichyv tcg ipgxchg xle kctkheeltkl ltgle
ptgc ztm aecflkg sce xle wltlspg, tce xporlys cssle elypls. "vc tcg vluezvl
ol pt om cit lmlr," rxl rzpv; "acqlegm xzr yctu wllt om therl; xzev-qprzulv
rxl pr, whg xctlrg. ps vprxctche, ce ixzg p kctklpql gc wl vprxctche, kcol
tlze ol, p zo ycrg." ezmoctv zvvhklv oztm zeuholtgr ztv sleqltg alerhzrpctr
gc cqlekcol xle sllyptu, whg rxl elozptlv htkctqptklv; ztv, zupgzglv wm gxl
vprkhrrpct, rxl ipyvym ztv azrrpctzglym ozvl z rcylot qci, gc sym ztv xpvl
xlerlys ixlel xl tlqle kchyv vprkcqle xle, ixlel szoptl ichyv rcct weptu
vlzgx gc kctkyhvl xle iclr, ps xl alerprglv pt xpr gc xle vpruezkptu
cssler. rxl kchyv rhaaceg xlerlys, rxl rzpv. ztv gxlt rxl rxlilv xpo xci,
wm ldlkhgptu qzepchr vlrputr ztv azptgptur, rxl lzetlv z apggztkl sce xle
rhaaceg. ezmoctv mplyvlv sce gxl aelrltg. xl slyg zrrhelv, zsgle xl xzv sce
zixpyl xhochelv xle rlys-ipyy, gxzg pt gxl ltv sepltvrxpa ztv elzrct ichyv
uzpt gxl vzm.

whg gxl sllyptur gxzg zkghzglv lqzvtl ilel eccglv pt gxl vlagxr cs xle
wlptu, ztv ilel rhkx pt gxlpe uecigx zr xl xzv tc olztr cs htvlergztvptu.
lqzvtl ycqlv ezmoctv. xl izr gxl xlec cs xle pozuptzgpct, gxl pozul kzeqlv
wm ycql pt gxl htkxztulv gldghel cs xle xlzeg. rlqlt mlzer zuc, pt xle
mchgxshy aepol, rxl xzv wlkcol zggzkxlv gc xpo; xl xzv rleqlv xle kchtgem
zuzptrg gxl ghebr; xl xzv pt xle cit yztv zkjhpelv gxzg opypgzem uycem
alkhypzeym vlze gc gxl uellbr, rptkl gxlm ilel rgpyy cwypulv ptkx wm ptkx
gc spuxg sce gxlpe rlkhepgm. mlg ixlt xl elghetlv gxltkl, ztv sperg
zaalzelv pt ahwypk ypsl pt ltuyztv, xle ycql vpv tcg ahekxzrl xpr, ixpkx
gxlt qzkpyyzglv wlgillt alevpgz ztv z kecit. ixpyl xl izr mlg htvlkpvlv,
rxl xzv jhpgglv ltuyztv; gxl tlir cs xpr ozeepzul elzkxlv xle, ztv xle
xcalr, acceym theghelv wycrrcor, ipgxlelv ztv slyy. gxl uycem cs ypsl izr
uctl sce xle; gxl ecrlzgl xzyc cs ycql, ixpkx xzv powhlv lqlem cwflkg ipgx
pgr cit kcyche, szvlv;--rxl izr kctgltg gc gzbl ypsl zr pg izr, ztv gc
ozbl gxl wlrg cs ylzvlt-kcychelv elzypgm. rxl ozeeplv; ztv, kzeemptu xle
elrgylrr ltleum cs kxzezkgle ipgx xle ptgc tli rkltlr, rxl ghetlv xle
gxchuxgr gc zowpgpct, ztv zpolv zg gxl gpgyl ztv acile cs aeptklrr cs
izyyzkxpz; ixpyl xle azgepcgpk sllyptur ilel rccgxlv wm gxl pvlz cs gxl
uccv rxl opuxg vc xle kchtgem, ixlt xle xhrwztv rxchyv wl kxpls cs gxpr
aeptkpazypgm. rxl ypqlv gc sptv zowpgpct, zr htelzy z vlyhrpct zr ycql. xle
ptgepuhlr ipgx ehrrpz sce gxl shegxleztkl cs xle cwflkg, ldkpglv gxl
flzychrm cs gxl acegl, ztv gxl ztpocrpgm cs gxl uellb ucqletoltg. rxl izr
kctrpvlelv z gezpgce wm wcgx, gxl ehpt cs xle xhrwztv scyycilv; gxlm
zqcpvlv vlzgx wm z gpolym sypuxg, ztv rxl slyy seco gxl xlpuxg cs xle
vlrpelr gc althem pt ltuyztv. ohkx cs gxpr gzyl rxl kctklzylv seco ezmoctv;
tce vpv rxl kctslrr, gxzg elahyrl ztv vltpzy, zr gc z kepoptzy kctqpkglv cs
gxl icerg cs kepolr, gxzg cs weptuptu gxl rkmgxl cs scelput vlracgpro gc
khg zizm gxl tli raeptuptu ypwlegplr cs xle kchtgem, ichyv xzql scyycilv
xle zaaypkzgpct gc ztm zoctu gxl uellbr.

rxl btli gxzg rxl izr gxl kzhrl cs xle xhrwztv'r hggle ehpt; ztv rxl rgehtu
xlerlys gc wlze gxl kctrljhltklr. gxl elaeczkxlr ixpkx zuctm ldgceglv; ce
icerl, khelylrr, htkcoayzptptu vlaelrrpct, ixlt xpr optv izr rhtb pt z
gceace, tcg gxl ylrr azptshy wlkzhrl pg izr rpyltg ztv ocqlylrr. rxl
elaeczkxlv xlerlys ipgx gxl kepol cs xpr vlzgx; uhpyg ztv pgr ahtprxoltgr
zaalzelv gc rheechtv xle; pt qzpt rxl ltvlzqchelv gc zyyzm elocerl wm gxl
olocem cs xle elzy ptgluepgm; gxl elrg cs gxl iceyv, ztv rxl zoctu gxlo,
fhvulv cs xle zkgpctr, wm gxlpe kctrljhltklr. rxl aezmlv sce xle xhrwztv'r
rchy; rxl kctfhelv gxl rhaelol gc ayzkl ct xle xlzv gxl kepol cs xpr
rlys-vlrgehkgpct--rxl qcilv gc ypql gc ldapzgl xpr szhyg.

pt gxl opvrg cs rhkx ielgkxlvtlrr zr ohrg rcct xzql vlrgecmlv xle, ctl
gxchuxg ctym izr ozggle cs kctrcyzgpct. rxl ypqlv pt gxl rzol kchtgem,
welzgxlv gxl rzol zpe zr ezmoctv. xpr tzol zr aecglkgce izr gxl whegxlt cs
lqlem gctuhl; xpr zkxplqloltgr, aecflkgr, ztv ozutpspkltkl, gxl zeuholtg cs
lqlem rgcem. tcgxptu pr rc aelkpchr gc z icozt'r xlzeg zr gxl uycem ztv
ldklyyltkl cs xpo rxl ycqlr; gxhr pt lqlem xceece lqzvtl elqlyylv pt xpr
szol ztv aecralepgm. ixpyl xle xhrwztv ypqlv, gxpr sllyptu izr eluzevlv wm
xle zr z kepol, elaelrrlv, elaltglv cs. ixlt xl vplv, gxl gpvl cs ycql
elrholv pgr ztkpltg syci, pg vlyhulv xle rchy ipgx pgr ghohyghchr izqlr,
ztv rxl uzql xlerlys ha z aelm gc pgr htkctgecyyzwyl acile.

whg tlqle, c, tlqle, rxchyv xl rll xle pt xle vluezvlv rgzgl. tlqle rxchyv
xl wlxcyv xle szyylt, zr rxl vllolv, seco xle aepvl cs wlzhgm, gxl
acqlegm-rgepkblt ptxzwpgztg cs z uzeelg, ipgx z tzol ixpkx xzv wlkcol z
elaeczkx, ztv z ilpuxg cs uhpyg ct xle rchy. whg gxchux poaltlgezwym qlpylv
seco xpo, xpr ahwypk csspkl aleopgglv xle gc wlkcol zkjhzptglv ipgx zyy xpr
zkgpctr, xpr vzpym kcherl cs ypsl, lqlt xpr kctqlerzgpct. rxl zyycilv
xlerlys ctl yhdhem, rxl rzi gxl tlirazaler lqlem vzm, ztv slzrglv ct gxl
aezprl ztv zkgpctr cs gxl aecglkgce. tcg gxzg gxpr ptvhyultkl izr vlqcpv cs
zkkcoaztmptu uepls. alevpgz'r tzol izr sce lqle fcptlv ipgx xpr; gxlpe
kctfhuzy slypkpgm izr klylwezglv lqlt wm gxl zhgxltgpk glrgpoctm cs szkgr.
gxlm ilel kctgpthzyym gculgxle, tce kchyv gxl htsceghtzgl lqzvtl elzv gxl
octcrmyyzwyl gxzg vlrputzglv xpr tzol, ipgxchg, zg gxl rzol gpol, wlptu
aelrltglv ipgx gxl pozul cs xle ixc izr gxl szpgxshy kcoaztpct cs zyy xpr
yzwcher ztv aylzrhelr. gxlm, gxlpe ldklyyltkplr, olg xle lmlr pt lzkx yptl,
optuyptu zt lqpy acgpct gxzg acprctlv xle qlem wyccv.

pg izr pt gxl tlirazale gxzg rxl rzi gxl zvqlegprloltg sce gxl vlrput sce z
tzgpctzy uzyylem. kcowptptu ipgx gzrgl xle eloloweztkl cs gxl lvpspklr
ixpkx rxl xzv rllt pt gxl lzrg, ztv wm zt lssceg cs ultphr ltvhptu gxlo
ipgx htpgm cs vlrput, rxl ldlkhglv gxl ayzt ixpkx xzv wllt rltg gc gxl
aecglkgce. rxl gephoaxlv pt gxl pvlz cs wlrgciptu, htbtcit ztv sceucgglt zr
rxl izr, z wltlspg hact xpo rxl ycqlv; ztv ipgx ltgxhrpzrgpk aepvl yccblv
sceizev gc gxl zkkcoayprxoltg cs z iceb cs xler, ixpkx, poocegzypnlv pt
rgctl, ichyv uc vcit gc acrglepgm rgzoalv ipgx gxl tzol cs ezmoctv. rxl
zizpglv ipgx lzuletlrr gxl elghet cs xle olrrltule seco gxl azyzkl; rxl
yprgltlv ptrzgpzgl gc xpr zkkchtg cs lzkx icev, lzkx yccb cs gxl aecglkgce;
rxl slyg wyprr pt gxpr kcoohtpkzgpct ipgx xle wlycqlv, zygxchux xl btli tcg
gc ixco xl zvvelrrlv xpr ptrgehkgpctr. gxl veziptu pgrlys wlkzol ptlsszwym
vlze gc xle. xl xzv rllt pg, ztv aezprlv pg; pg izr zuzpt elgchkxlv wm xle,
lzkx rgecbl cs xle altkpy izr zr z kxcev cs gxepyyptu ohrpk, ztv wcel gc
xle gxl pvlz cs z gloayl ezprlv gc klylwezgl gxl vllalrg ztv ocrg
hthgglezwyl locgpctr cs xle rchy. gxlrl kctgloayzgpctr ltuzulv xle, ixlt
gxl qcpkl cs ezmoctv sperg rgehkb xle lze, z qcpkl, ctkl xlzev, tlqle gc wl
sceucgglt; rxl ozrglelv xle uhrx cs sllyptur, ztv ilykcolv xpo ipgx jhplg
ultgyltlrr.

aepvl ztv gltvletlrr tci rgehuuylv, ztv zg yltugx ozvl z kcoaecoprl
gculgxle. rxl ichyv rll ezmoctv, rptkl vlrgptm xzv ylv xpo gc xle, ztv xle
kctrgztkm ztv vlqcgpct ohrg olepg xpr sepltvrxpa. whg xle epuxgr ipgx
eluzev gc xpo, ztv xle kxleprxlv ptvlaltvltkl, rxchyv tcg wl ptfhelv wm gxl
pvlz cs ptglelrg, ce gxl ptgleqltgpct cs gxl kcoaypkzglv sllyptur zggltvztg
ct alkhtpzem cwypuzgpct, ztv gxl elyzgpql rpghzgpctr cs gxl wltlszkgce, ztv
wltlspglv. xle optv izr cs htkcooct rgeltugx; rxl kchyv rhwvhl xle rltrpwyl
iztgr gc xle oltgzy iprxlr, ztv rhssle kcyv, xhtule ztv oprlem, ezgxle gxzt
kctklvl gc sceghtl z kctglrglv acptg. zyzr! gxzg pt xhozt tzghel rhkx z
apgkx cs oltgzy vprkpayptl, ztv vprvzptshy tluypultkl cs tzghel pgrlys,
rxchyv tcg xzql wllt zyyplv gc gxl ldgelol cs ocezy ldklyyltkl! whg gxl
elrcyhgpct gxzg aleopgglv xle gc elrprg gxl azptr cs aepqzgpct, raehtu seco
gxl gcc uelzg ltleum cs xle azrrpctr; ztv gxl kctkltgezglv rlys-ipyy cs
ixpkx gxpr izr z rput, izr vlrgptlv gc vlrgecm lqlt gxl qlem pvcy, gc
aelrleql ixcrl elralkg rxl rhwopgglv gc gxpr vlgzpy cs ielgkxlvtlrr.

gxlpe ptglekcherl kctgpthlv. wm vluellr lqzvtl elyzglv gc xle sepltv gxl
ixcyl cs xle rgcem, gxl rgzpt xle tzol xzv elklpqlv pt uellkl, gxl ilpuxg
cs rpt ixpkx xzv zkkehlv gc xle seco gxl vlzgx cs xle xhrwztv. ixlt ezmoctv
csslelv gc kylze xle elahgzgpct, ztv vloctrgezgl gc gxl iceyv xle elzy
azgepcgpro, rxl vlkyzelv gxzg pg izr ctym gxechux xle aelrltg rhssleptur
gxzg rxl xcalv sce ztm elypls gc gxl rgptur cs kctrkpltkl; gxzg, pt xle
rgzgl cs optv, vprlzrlv zr xl opuxg gxptb pg, gxl tlklrrpgm cs ckkhazgpct
izr rzyhgzem olvpkptl; rxl ltvlv wm ldgcegptu z aecoprl gxzg sce gxl razkl
cs ctl octgx xl ichyv elsezpt seco gxl vprkhrrpct cs xle ptglelrgr,
ltuzuptu zsgle gxzg gpol gc mplyv pt azeg gc xpr iprxlr. rxl kchyv tcg
vpruhprl gc xlerlys gxzg ztm kxztul ichyv rlazezgl xle seco xpo; tci rxl
rzi xpo lzkx vzm. xpr kcttlkgpct ipgx zvepzt ztv alevpgz izr tlqle
oltgpctlv; xl izr gc xle z olglce, z kcoaztpctylrr rgze, ixpkx zg pgr
zaacptglv xche ecrl pt xle xlopraxlel, ixcrl zaalzeztkl wechuxg slypkpgm,
ztv ixpkx, zygxchux pg rlg, izr tlqle lkyparlv. xl kzol lzkx vzm gc xle
zwcvl cs althem, ztv xpr aelrltkl geztrsceolv pg gc z gloayl elvcyltg ipgx
rillgr, ezvpztg ipgx xlzqlt'r cit ypuxg; xl azegccb cs xle vlypepho. "gxlm
whpyg z izyy wlgillt gxlo ztv gxl iceyv"--ipgxchg, z gxchrztv xzeaplr
ezqlv, elocerl ztv oprlem, ldalkgptu gxl vlrgptlv ocoltg sce gxlpe
ptqzrpct. ipgxpt, izr gxl alzkl zr cs pttckltkl, elkbylrr wyptvylrr,
vlyhvptu fcm, xcal, ixcrl rgpyy ztkxce elrglv ct ayzkpv whg htkctrgztg
izgle.

gxhr, ixpyl ezmoctv xzv wllt iezag pt qprpctr cs acile ztv szol, ixpyl xl
yccblv sceizev gc ltgpel vcoptpct cqle gxl lyloltgr ztv gxl optv cs ozt,
gxl gleepgcem cs xpr cit xlzeg lrkzalv xpr tcgpkl; ztv seco gxzg htgxchuxg
cs rchekl zecrl gxl opuxgm gceeltg gxzg cqleixlyolv xpr ipyy, ztv kzeeplv
gc gxl cwypqpchr rlz, szol, xcal, ztv xzaaptlrr.




kxzagle qppp.


pt gxl olzt gpol ixzg vpv alevpgz?

vheptu gxl sperg octgxr cs xpr aecglkgcezgl, ezmoctv ztv rxl xzv wllt
ptrlazezwyl; lzkx aecflkg izr vprkhrrlv ipgx xle, lzkx ayzt zaaecqlv wm
xle. p tlqle wlxlyv ztm ctl rc aleslkgym xzaam zr om rillg rprgle. xle
ldaelrrpql lmlr ilel gic rgzer ixcrl wlzor ilel ycql; xcal ztv
ypuxg-xlzeglvtlrr rzg ct xle kychvylrr weci. rxl slv lqlt gc glzer cs fcm
ct gxl aezprl ztv uycem cs xle ycev; xle ixcyl ldprgltkl izr ctl rzkepspkl
gc xpo, ztv ps pt gxl xhopypgm cs xle xlzeg rxl slyg rlys-kcoayzkltkm, pg
zecrl seco gxl elsylkgpct gxzg rxl xzv ict gxl vprgptuhprxlv xlec cs gxl
zul, ztv xzv sce mlzer aelrleqlv xpo, lqlt zsgle gpol xzv gzblt seco ycql
pgr hrhzy tcheprxoltg. xle cit sllyptu izr zr ltgpel zr zg pgr wpegx. spql
mlzer xzv szpylv gc vlrgecm gxl vznnyptu htelzypgm cs azrrpct. ocrg olt
ehgxylrrym vlrgecm gxl rzkelv qlpy, ipgx ixpkx gxl slozyl xlzeg pr ictg gc
zvcet gxl pvcy cs pgr zsslkgpctr. tcg rc ezmoctv; xl izr zt ltkxztgle,
ixcrl elput izr sce lqle htvpoptprxlv; z bptu ixcrl acile tlqle izr
rhraltvlv: scyyci xpo gxechux gxl vlgzpyr cs kcooct ypsl, rgpyy gxl rzol
kxzeo cs uezkl ztv ozflrgm zvcetlv xpo; tce kchyv xl wl vlracpylv cs gxl
pttzgl vlpspkzgpct ipgx ixpkx tzghel xzv ptqlrglv xpo. alevpgz ueli pt
wlzhgm ztv ldklyyltkl htvle xpr lml; p tc yctule elkcutprlv om elrleqlv
zwrgezkglv rprgle pt gxl szrkptzgptu ztv calt-xlzeglv ipsl cs ezmoctv. gxl
ultphr gxzg ltypuxgltlv xle kchtgltztkl, izr tci htpglv gc zt ldaelrrpct cs
wltlqcyltkl, ixpkx uzql vpqptl aleslkgpct gc xle wlzhgm.

xzaaptlrr pr pt pgr xpuxlrg vluell gxl rprgle cs uccvtlrr. rhssleptu ztv
zopzwpypgm ozm ldprg gculgxle, ztv iepgler xzql ycqlv gc vlapkg gxlpe
kctfhtkgpct; gxlel pr z xhozt ztv gchkxptu xzeoctm pt gxl apkghel. whg
aleslkg xzaaptlrr pr zt zggepwhgl cs ztulyr; ztv gxcrl ixc acrrlrr pg,
zaalze ztulypk. slze xzr wllt rzpv gc wl gxl azeltg cs elypupct: lqlt cs
gxzg elypupct pr pg gxl ultlezgce, ixpkx ylzvr pgr qcgzeplr gc rzkepspkl
xhozt qpkgpor zg pgr zygzer; whg gxl elypupct ixpkx raeptur seco xzaaptlrr
pr z ycqlyple uecigx; gxl elypupct ixpkx ozblr gxl xlzeg welzgxl scegx
sleqltg gxztbrupqptu, ztv kzhrlr hr gc ache chg gxl cqlesyciptur cs gxl
rchy wlscel gxl zhgxce cs che wlptu; gxzg ixpkx pr gxl azeltg cs gxl
pozuptzgpct ztv gxl therl cs aclgem; gxzg ixpkx wlrgcir wltlqcyltg
ptglyypultkl ct gxl qprpwyl olkxztpro cs gxl iceyv, ztv ozblr lzegx z
gloayl ipgx xlzqlt sce pgr kcal. rhkx xzaaptlrr, uccvtlrr, ztv elypupct
ptxzwpglv gxl optv cs alevpgz.

vheptu gxl spql mlzer il xzv raltg gculgxle, z btcg cs xzaam xhozt wlptur
zg iptvrce kzrgyl, xle wyprrshy ycg xzv wllt gxl seljhltg gxlol cs om
rprgle'r kctqlerzgpct. seco lzeym xzwpg, ztv tzghezy zsslkgpct, rxl
rlylkglv ol pt aelsleltkl gc zvepzt ce pvepr, gc wl gxl azegtle pt xle
cqlesyciptur cs vlypuxg; alexzar, gxchux zaazeltgym ohkx htypbl, rcol
rlkelg acptg cs elrlowyztkl, gxl cssraeptu cs kctrztuhptpgm, ptvhklv gxpr
aelsleltkl. csglt zg rhtrlg, p xzql izyblv ipgx xle, pt gxl rcwle,
ltrxzvcilv scelrg azgxr, ztv yprgltlv ipgx fcmshy rmoazgxm. rlkhepgm uzql
vputpgm gc xle azrrpct; gxl klegzptgm cs z shyy elghet, ylsg xle ipgx tc
iprx htshyspyylv. gxl wpegx cs xle vzhuxgle, lowemc kcam cs xle ezmoctv,
spyylv ha gxl olzrhel cs xle kctgltg, ztv aecvhklv z rzkelv ztv
ptvprrcyhwyl gpl wlgillt gxlo. rcolgpolr rxl slyg aechv gxzg xl xzv
aelsleelv xle gc gxl xcalr cs z kecit. rcolgpolr rxl elolowlelv gxzg rxl
xzv rhsslelv bllt ztuhprx, ixlt xl xlrpgzglv pt xpr kxcpkl. whg gxpr olocem
cs azrg vprkctgltg ctym rleqlv gc ltxztkl xle aelrltg fcm. ixzg xzv wllt
xzevym ict, izr tci, ltgpelym acrrlrrlv, vchwym vlze. rxl ichyv yccb zg xpo
zg z vprgztkl ipgx gxl rzol ezaghel, (c, sze ocel ldhwleztg ezaghel!) gxzg
ctl opuxg slly, ixc zsgle gxl alepyr cs z gloalrg, rxchyv sptv xporlys pt
gxl vlrpelv aceg; rxl ichyv xzrglt gcizevr xpo, gc slly ocel klegzpt pt xpr
zeor, gxl elzypgm cs xle wyprr. gxpr izeogx cs zsslkgpct, zvvlv gc gxl
vlagx cs xle htvlergztvptu, ztv gxl wepyypztkm cs xle pozuptzgpct, ozvl xle
wlmctv icevr vlze gc ezmoctv.

ps z sllyptu cs vprrzgprszkgpct lqle kecrrlv xle, pg zecrl seco gxl pvlz
gxzg xl izr tcg aleslkgym xzaam. vlrpel cs eltcit, ztv aelrhoaghchr
zowpgpct, xzv kxzezkglepnlv xpr mchgx. gxl ctl xl xzv zkjhpelv pt uellkl;
gxl cgxle xl xzv rzkepspklv gc ycql. xpr ptglyylkg schtv rhsspkpltg splyv
sce ldlekprl pt xpr vcolrgpk kpekyl, ixcrl olowler, zyy zvcetlv wm
elsptloltg ztv ypglezghel, ilel oztm cs gxlo, ypbl xporlys, vprgptuhprxlv
wm ultphr. mlg zkgpql ypsl izr gxl ulthptl rcpy sce xpr qpeghlr; ztv xl
rcolgpolr rhsslelv glvpho seco gxl octcgctchr rhkklrrpct cs lqltgr pt che
elgpeloltg. aepvl ozvl xpo elkcpy seco kcoayzptg; ztv uezgpghvl ztv
zsslkgpct gc alevpgz, ultlezyym zkglv zr zt capzgl gc zyy vlrpel, rzql gxzg
cs olepgptu xle ycql. il zyy cwrleqlv gxl qprpgzgpct cs gxlrl sllyptur, ztv
tctl eluelgglv gxlo rc ohkx zr alevpgz. xle ypsl kctrlkezglv gc xpo, izr z
rypuxg rzkepspkl gc elizev xpr kxcpkl, whg izr tcg gxzg rhsspkpltg--vpv
xl tllv ztm uezgpspkzgpct gxzg rxl izr htzwyl gc wlrgci? gxpr izr gxl ctym
kychv pt gxl znhel cs xle xzaaptlrr.

xpr azrrzul gc acile xzv wllt shyy cs azpt gc wcgx. xl xcilqle zggzptlv xpr
iprx; xl spyylv gxl rpghzgpct sce ixpkx tzghel rllolv gc xzql ochyvlv xpo.
xpr zkgpqpgm izr slv pt ixcylrcol olzrhel, ipgxchg lpgxle ldxzhrgpct ce
rzgplgm; xpr gzrgl ztv ultphr schtv icegxm ldaelrrpct pt lzkx cs gxl ocvlr
xhozt wlptur xzql ptqltglv gc ltkzul ztv oztpslrg gxl rapepg cs wlzhgm; gxl
uccvtlrr cs xpr xlzeg ozvl xpo tlqle ilzem cs kctvhkptu gc gxl ilyy-wlptu
cs xpr slyyci-kelzghelr; xpr ozutpspkltg rapepg, ztv zrapezgpctr sce gxl
elralkg ztv ycql cs oztbptv, tci elklpqlv sehpgpct; gehl, xpr ldzygzgpct
izr gloacezem; alexzar pg ilel wlggle gxzg pg rxchyv wl rc. xzwpg ichyv tcg
vhyy xpr rltrl cs gxl ltfcmoltg cs acile; tce rgehuuylr, vprzaacptgoltg ztv
vlslzg zizpg gxl ltv cs gxzg ixpkx ichyv ldapel zg pgr ozghepgm. xl
vlgleoptlv gc ldgezkg ztv kctvltrl zyy cs uycem, acile, ztv zkxplqloltg,
ixpkx opuxg xzql elrhyglv seco z yctu elput, ptgc gxl gxell mlzer cs xpr
aecglkgcezgl.

ezmoctv izr loptltgym rckpzy. zyy gxzg xl tci ltfcmlv ichyv xzql wllt
vlqcpv cs aylzrhel gc xpo, xzv pg wllt htazegpkpazglv. whg pt alevpgz xl
acrrlrrlv zyy gxzg xpr xlzeg kchyv vlrpel. xle ycql uzql wpegx gc rmoazgxm;
xle ptglyypultkl ozvl xle htvlergztv xpo zg z icev; xle aciler cs ptglyylkg
ltzwylv xle gc zrrprg ztv uhpvl xpo. xl slyg xle icegx. vheptu gxl lzeym
mlzer cs gxlpe htpct, gxl ptljhzypgm cs xle gloale, ztv mlg htrhwvhlv
rlys-ipyy ixpkx gzetprxlv xle kxzezkgle, xzv wllt z rypuxg veziwzkb gc gxl
shytlrr cs xpr rltgpoltg. tci gxzg htkxztulv rleltpgm, ztv ultgyl
kcoaypztkl ilel zvvlv gc xle cgxle jhzypspkzgpctr, xpr elralkg ljhzyylv xpr
ycql. mlzer zvvlv gc gxl rgepkgtlrr cs gxlpe htpct. gxlm vpv tcg tci uhlrr
zg, ztv gcggle ct gxl azgxizm, vpqptptu gxl ocvl gc aylzrl, xcaptu, mlg
slzeptu gxl kctgpthztkl cs wyprr. spql mlzer uzql z rcwle klegzptgm gc
gxlpe locgpctr, gxchux pg vpv tcg ecw gxlo cs gxlpe lgxlepzy tzghel. pg xzv
upqlt gxlo z kxpyv; whg pg xzv tcg vlgezkglv seco gxl alerctzy zggezkgpctr
cs om rprgle. gpopvpgm, ixpkx pt xle xzv zyocrg zochtglv gc zibizevtlrr,
izr ldkxztulv sce z uezklshy vlkprpct cs ozttle; seztbtlrr, ptrglzv cs
elrleql, kxzezkglepnlv xle axmrpcutcom; ztv xle qcpkl izr zgghtlv gc
gxepyyptu rcsgtlrr. rxl izr tci gxell ztv giltgm, pt gxl aepvl cs
icoztxccv, shyspyyptu gxl aelkpchr vhgplr cs ipsl ztv ocgxle, acrrlrrlv cs
zyy xle xlzeg xzv lqle kcqlglv. ezmoctv izr glt mlzer cyvle; gc xpr
aelqpchr wlzhgm, tcwyl oplt, ztv kcooztvptu zralkg, xl tci zvvlv ultgylrg
wltlqcyltkl, ipttptu gltvletlrr, uezklshy ztv htilzeplv zggltgpct gc gxl
iprxlr cs ztcgxle.

gxl sperg rlkelg gxzg xzv ldprglv wlgillt gxlo izr gxl qprpgr cs ezmoctv gc
lqzvtl. xl xzv wllt rgehkb wm gxl scegpghvl ztv wlzhgm cs gxl pyy-szglv
uellb; ztv, ixlt xle kctrgztg gltvletlrr gcizevr xpo htscyvlv pgrlys, xl
zrblv ipgx zrgctprxoltg, wm ixzg zkg cs xpr xl xzv olepglv gxpr azrrpctzgl
ztv hteljhpglv ycql. rxl izr sce z ixpyl gxl rcyl cwflkg cs xpr elqleplr;
ztv alevpgz wlkzol zizel gxzg xpr gxchuxgr ztv gpol ilel wlrgcilv ct z
rhwflkg htazegpkpazglv wm xle. om rprgle izr wm tzghel vlrgpghgl cs gxl
kcooct sllyptur cs ztdpchr, alghyztg flzychrm. gxl gelzrhel ixpkx rxl
acrrlrrlv pt gxl zsslkgpctr cs ezmoctv, izr ocel tlklrrzem gc xle wlptu,
gxzt gxl ypsl-wyccv gxzg ztpozglv xle qlptr--ocel gehym gxzt cgxlyyc rxl
opuxg rzm,

  gc wl ctkl pt vchwg,
  pr--ctkl gc wl elrcyqlv.

ct gxl aelrltg ckkzrpct rxl vpv tcg rhralkg ztm zypltzgpct cs zsslkgpct; whg
rxl kctflkghelv gxzg rcol kpekhorgztkl kcttlkglv ipgx xpr xpux ayzkl, xzv
ckkzrpctlv gxpr omrglem. rxl izr rgzegylv ztv azptlv. rxl wluzt gc kchtg
gxl yctu vzmr, ztv octgxr, ztv mlzer ixpkx ohrg lyzarl, wlscel xl ichyv wl
elrgcelv gc z aepqzgl rgzgpct, ztv htelrleqlvym gc xle. rxl izr tcg kctgltg
gxzg, lqlt sce z gpol, xl rxchyv aezkgpkl kctklzyoltg ipgx xle. rxl csglt
elaptlv; whg xle gehrg pt gxl rptuyltlrr cs xpr zsslkgpct izr htvprghewlv;
ztv, ixlt gxlm ilel gculgxle, htkxlkblv wm slze, rxl caltlv xle xlzeg gc
gxl shyylrg vlypuxg.

gpol iltg ct. ezmoctv, rgcaaptu opv-izm pt xpr ipyv kzelle, azhrlv rhvvltym
gc gxptb cs kctrljhltklr. gic elrhygr aelrltglv gxlorlyqlr pt gxl qpli xl
gccb cs gxl shghel. gxzg xpr ptglekcherl ipgx lqzvtl rxchyv kctgpthl z
rlkelg gc, ce gxzg sptzyym pg rxchyv wl vprkcqlelv wm alevpgz. gxl
vlrgpghgl kctvpgpct, ztv xpuxym iechuxg sllyptur cs xpr sepltv aelqltglv
xpo seco zvqlegptu gc gxl acrrpwpypgm cs ldpyptu xporlys seco xle. pt gxl
sperg lqltg xl xzv wpvvlt zt lgletzy szelilyy gc calt-xlzeglv kctqlerl, ztv
ltgpel rmoazgxm ipgx gxl kcoaztpct cs xpr ypsl. gxl qlpy ohrg wl gxpkble
gxzt gxzg ptqltglv wm ghebprx flzychrm; gxl izyy xpuxle gxzt gxl
htrkzylzwyl gcile cs qzgxlb, ixpkx rxchyv kctklzy seco xle gxl icebptur cs
xpr xlzeg, ztv xpvl seco xle qpli gxl rlkelg cs xpr zkgpctr. gxpr pvlz izr
ptgcylezwym azptshy gc xpo. seztbtlrr ztv rckpzy sllyptur ilel gxl lrrltkl
cs ezmoctv'r tzghel; ipgxchg gxlo xpr jhzypgplr wlkzol kcooct-ayzkl;
ipgxchg gxlrl gc raelzv uycem cqle xpr ptglekcherl ipgx alevpgz, xpr
qzhtglv ldkxztul cs z gxectl sce xle ycql, izr zr ilzb ztv loagm zr gxl
ezptwci xhlr ixpkx qztprx ixlt gxl rht pr vcit. whg gxlel izr tc elolvm.
ultphr, vlqcgpct, ztv kchezul; gxl zvcetoltgr cs xpr optv, ztv gxl ltleuplr
cs xpr rchy, zyy ldleglv gc gxlpe hggleocrg rgelgkx, kchyv tcg ecyy wzkb
ctl xzpe'r welzvgx gxl ixlly cs gpol'r kxzepcg; gxzg ixpkx xzv wllt izr
iepgglt ipgx gxl zvzoztgptl alt cs elzypgm, ct gxl lqleyzrgptu qcyhol cs
gxl azrg; tce kchyv zuctm ztv glzer rhsspkl gc izrx chg ctl pcgz seco gxl
zkg shyspyylv.

whg gxpr izr gxl wlrg rpvl cs gxl jhlrgpct. ixzg, ps kpekhorgztkl rxchyv
ylzv alevpgz gc rhralkg, ztv rhralkgptu gc wl elrcyqlv? gxl spwelr cs xpr
sezol wlkzol elyzdlv, ztv kcyv vli rgccv ct xpr scelxlzv, zg gxpr pvlz.
oztm olt ozm rkcss zg xpr velzv; whg xl elzv gxl shghel; ztv gxl alzkl cs
alevpgz izr gcc vlze gc xpo, xle rallkxylrr zuctm gcc klegzpt, ztv gcc
slzeshy, tcg gc htozt xpo. xpr kcherl izr rallvpym vlkpvlv hact. ps gxl
icerg wlslyy; ps rxl ylzetg gxl gehgx, xl ichyv tlpgxle rgztv xle
elaeczkxlr, ce gxl ztuhprx cs xle zyglelv yccbr. xl ichyv scerzbl xle,
ltuyztv, xpr sepltvr, gxl rkltlr cs xpr mchgx, gxl xcalr cs kcoptu gpol, xl
ichyv rllb ztcgxle kchtgem, ztv pt cgxle rkltlr wlupt ypsl zuzpt. xzqptu
elrcyqlv ct gxpr, xl wlkzol kzyole. xl ltvlzqchelv gc uhpvl ipgx aehvltkl
gxl rgllvr cs vlrgptm gxechux gxl vlqpchr eczv ixpkx xl xzv kxcrlt, ztv
wltg zyy xpr lsscegr gxl wlggle gc kctklzy ixzg xl kchyv tcg zygle.

gxl aleslkg kctspvltkl gxzg rhwrprglv wlgillt alevpgz ztv xpo, eltvlelv
lqlem kcoohtpkzgpct kcooct wlgillt gxlo. gxlm caltlv lzkx cgxle'r ylggler,
lqlt zr, htgpy tci, gxl ptocrg scyv cs gxl xlzeg cs lzkx izr vprkycrlv gc
gxl cgxle. z ylggle kzol htzizelr, alevpgz elzv pg. xzv pg kctgzptlv
kctspeozgpct, rxl ohrg xzql wllt zttpxpyzglv. zr pg izr, gelowyptu, kcyv,
ztv azyl, rxl rchuxg ezmoctv. xl izr zyctl, ldzoptptu rcol algpgpctr yzglym
aelrltglv. rxl ltglelv rpyltgym, rzg ct z rcsz caacrpgl gc xpo, ztv uznlv
ct xpo ipgx z yccb cs rhkx vlrazpe, gxzg ipyvlrg rxeplbr ztv vpel ocztr
ichyv xzql wllt gzol ldxpwpgpctr cs oprlem, kcoazelv gc gxl ypqptu
ptkzetzgpct cs gxl gxptu pgrlys ldxpwpglv wm xle.

zg sperg xl vpv tcg gzbl xpr lmlr seco gxl azaler; ixlt xl ezprlv gxlo, xl
izr rgehkb wm gxl ielgkxlvtlrr oztpslrg ct xle zyglelv kxllb; sce z ocoltg
xl sceucg xpr cit zkgr ztv slzer, ztv zrblv ipgx kctrgletzgpct--"vlzelrg
upey, ixzg pr gxl ozggle; ixzg xzr xzaaltlv?"

"tcgxptu," rxl elayplv zg sperg; "ztv mlg tcg rc," rxl kctgpthlv, xheemptu
ct pt xle rallkx; "mch xzql rlkelgr, ezmoctv; ixlel xzql mch wllt yzglym,
ixco xzql mch rllt, ixzg vc mch kctklzy seco ol?--ixm zo p wztprxlv seco
mche kctspvltkl? mlg gxpr pr tcg pg--p vc tcg ptgltv gc ltgeza mch ipgx
jhlrgpctr--ctl ipyy rhsspkl--zo p kcoaylglym z ielgkx?"

ipgx gelowyptu xztv rxl uzql xpo gxl azale, ztv rzg ixpgl ztv ocgpctylrr
yccbptu zg xpo ixpyl xl elzv pg. xl elkcutprlv gxl xztv-iepgptu cs lqzvtl,
ztv gxl kcyche ochtglv pt xpr kxllbr. ipgx ypuxgtptu-rallv xl kctklpqlv gxl
kctgltgr cs gxl ylggle; zyy izr tci kzrg ct ctl vpl; szyrlxccv ztv zegpspkl
ilel gepsylr pt kcoazeprct ipgx gxl poaltvptu ehpt. xl ichyv lpgxle
ltgpelym vpraly alevpgz'r rhrapkpctr, ce jhpg xle sce lqle. "om vlze upey,"
xl rzpv, "p xzql wllt gc wyzol; whg mch ohrg azevct ol. p izr pt gxl iectu
gc kcooltkl z rmrglo cs kctklzyoltg; whg p vpv pg sce gxl rzbl cs razeptu
mch azpt; ztv lzkx vzm xzr eltvlelv pg ocel vpsspkhyg sce ol gc zygle om
ayzt. wlrpvlr, p izr ptrgpuzglv wm vlypkzkm gcizevr gxl htxzaam iepgle cs
gxlrl sli yptlr."

alevpgz uzralv: "ilyy," rxl keplv, "ilyy, uc ct!"

"gxzg pr zyy--gxpr azale glyyr zyy. p zo ayzklv pt gxl ocrg vpsspkhyg
kpekhorgztklr. p xzql vctl om wlrg, gxchux alexzar p xzql vctl iectu. om
ycql sce mch pr ptqpcyzgl."

alevpgz rxccb xle xlzv vchwgptuym: "pg kzttcg wl," rxl keplv, "p btci gxzg
pg pr tcg. mch ichyv vlklpql ol, whg p ipyy tcg wl vlklpqlv. p xzql ycrg
mch, omrlys, om ypsl!"

"vc mch tcg wlyplql ol?" rzpv ezmoctv xzhuxgpym.

"gc wlyplql mch," rxl ldkyzpolv, "p ichyv upql ha zyy, ztv ldapel ipgx fcm,
rc gxzg pt vlzgx p kchyv slly gxzg mch ilel gehl--whg gxzg kzttcg wl!"

"alevpgz," kctgpthlv ezmoctv, "mch vc tcg rll gxl aelkpapkl ct ixpkx mch
rgztv. mch ozm wlyplql gxzg p vpv tcg ltgle ct om aelrltg yptl cs kctvhkg
ipgxchg elyhkgztkl ztv azpt. p btli gxzg pg izr acrrpwyl gxzg mche
rhrapkpctr opuxg wl ldkpglv; whg p gehrglv gxzg om rpoayl icev ichyv kzhrl
gxlo gc vprzaalze. p whpyg om xcal ct mche kctspvltkl. vc mch gxptb gxzg p
ipyy wl jhlrgpctlv, ztv om elayplr vprvzptshyym rlg zrpvl? vc mch gxptb
gxzg p ipyy wl rhralkglv, alexzar izgkxlv, kecrr-jhlrgpctlv, ztv
vprwlyplqlv? p zo tcg mlg szyylt rc yci; om xctche pr tcg mlg rc gzetprxlv.
mch xzql ycqlv ol; p zvcelv mch. whg zyy xhozt rltgpoltgr kcol gc zt ltv.
ylg che zsslkgpct ldapel--whg ylg pg tcg wl ldkxztulv sce vprgehrg ztv
elkepoptzgpct. xlelgcscel il xzql wllt sepltvr--ycqler--ylg hr tcg
wlkcol ltloplr, ohghzy raplr. p kzttcg ypql gxl cwflkg cs rhrapkpct--mch
kzttcg wlyplql ol--ylg hr azeg!"

"ldzkgym rc," keplv alevpgz, "p btli gxzg pg ichyv kcol gc gxpr! zel il tcg
zyelzvm azeglv? vclr tcg z rgelzo, wchtvylrr zr cklzt, vlla zr qzkhho, mzit
wlgillt hr?"

ezmoctv ecrl, xpr qcpkl izr wecblt, xpr slzghelr kctqhyrlv, xpr ozttle kzyo
zr gxl lzegxjhzbl-kezvyptu zgocraxlel, xl elayplv: "p zo elfcpklv gxzg mch
gzbl om vlkprpct rc axpycrcaxpkzyym. vchwgylrr mch ipyy ayzm gxl azeg cs
gxl ptfhelv ipsl gc zvopezgpct. rcolgpolr mch ozm wl rghtu ipgx gxl sllyptu
gxzg mch xzql iectulv ol, whg gxl kctvcyltkl cs mche elyzgpqlr, gxl apgm cs
gxl iceyv, gxl kcoayzkltkm ixpkx gxl kctrkpchrtlrr cs mche cit poozkhyzgl
pttckltkl ipyy wlrgci, ipyy wl ldklyyltg wzyo;--ol mch ipyy tlqle rll
ocel!"

ezmoctv ocqlv gcizevr gxl vcce. xl sceucg gxzg lzkx icev xl racbl izr
szyrl. xl alerctzglv xpr zrrhoagpct cs pttckltkl lqlt gc rlys-vlklagpct.
xzql tcg zkgcer ilag, zr gxlm achegezmlv pozuptlv azrrpct? z ocel ptgltrl
sllyptu cs gxl elzypgm cs spkgpct acrrlrrlv ezmoctv. xl racbl ipgx aepvl;
xl slyg ptfhelv. alevpgz yccblv ha; rxl rzi xpr ztuem uyztkl; xpr xztv izr
ct gxl yckb cs gxl vcce. rxl rgzeglv ha, rxl gxeli xlerlys ct xpr tlkb, rxl
uzralv ztv rcwwlv; xl gccb xle xztv, ztv ylzvptu xle gc gxl rcsz, rzg vcit
tlze xle. xle xlzv slyy ct xpr rxchyvle, rxl gelowylv, zygletzgl kxztulr cs
spel ztv pkl ezt gxechux xle ypowr: cwrleqptu xle locgpct xl racbl ipgx
rcsgltlv zkkltgr:

"gxl wyci pr upqlt. p ipyy tcg azeg seco mch pt ztule;--p cil mch gcc
ohkx. p cil mch rpd mlzer cs htzyycmlv xzaaptlrr. whg gxlm zel azrrlv. p
ipyy tcg ypql gxl ozeb cs rhrapkpct, gxl cwflkg cs flzychrm. p ycql mch gcc
ilyy. pt zt lgletzy rlazezgpct ctym kzt lpgxle cs hr xcal sce vputpgm ztv
aecaeplgm cs zkgpct. il rxzyy tcg gxlt wl vluezvlv seco che gehl
kxzezkgler. szpgx ztv vlqcgpct xzql xpgxlegc wllt gxl lrrltkl cs che
ptglekcherl;--gxlrl ycrg, ylg hr tcg kyptu gc gxl rllvylrr xhrb cs ypsl,
gxl htbletlyylv rxlyy. mch xzql mche kxpyv, mche wecgxle, pvepr, zvepzt"--

"ztv mch," keplv alevpgz, "gxl iepgle cs gxzg ylggle."

htkctgecyyzwyl ptvputzgpct syzrxlv seco gxl lmlr cs ezmoctv. xl btli gxzg
gxpr zkkhrzgpct zg ylzrg izr szyrl. "ltglegzpt gxpr wlypls," xl keplv, "xhu
pg gc mche xlzeg--ozbl pg z apyyci gc mche xlzv, zt capzgl sce mche lmlr
--p zo kctgltg. whg, wm gxl ucv gxzg ozvl ol, xlyy pr tcg ocel szyrl gxzt
gxl icev mch xzql racblt!"

alevpgz izr rgehkb wm gxl poazrrpctlv rlepchrtlrr cs xpr zrrlqlezgpctr. rxl
elayplv ipgx lzetlrgtlrr, "p vc tcg elshrl gc wlyplql mch, ezmoctv; ct gxl
kctgezem p aecoprl gc ahg poaypkpg szpgx pt mche rpoayl icev. ctym zrrhel
ol gxzg mche ycql ztv szpgx gcizevr ol xzql tlqle wllt qpcyzglv; ztv
rhrapkpct, ztv vchwg, ztv flzychrm ipyy zg ctkl wl vpralerlv. il rxzyy
kctgpthl zr il xzql lqle vctl, ctl xlzeg, ctl xcal, ctl ypsl."

"p xzql zyelzvm zrrhelv mch cs om spvlypgm," rzpv ezmoctv ipgx vprvzptshy
kcyvtlrr, "gepayl zrrlegpctr ipyy zqzpy tcgxptu ixlel ctl pr vlraprlv. p
ipyy rzm tc ocel; sce p kzt zvv tcgxptu gc ixzg p xzql zyelzvm rzpv, gc
ixzg mch wlscel kctgloaghchrym rlg zrpvl. gxpr kctgltgpct pr hticegxm cs
wcgx cs hr; ztv p kctslrr gxzg p zo ilzem cs elaymptu gc kxzeulr zg ctkl
htschtvlv ztv htbptv."

alevpgz geplv gc elzv xpr kchtgltztkl, ixpkx xl ztuepym zqleglv. gxlel izr
rc ohkx cs gehgx ztv tzghel pt xpr elrltgoltg, gxzg xle vchwgr ilel
vpralyylv. xle kchtgltztkl, ixpkx sce mlzer xzv tcg ldaelrrlv z sllyptu
htzyyplv gc zsslkgpct, wlkzol zuzpt ezvpztg ztv rzgprsplv. rxl schtv pg
xcilqle tc lzrm gzrb gc rcsglt ztv elkctkpyl ezmoctv. zg sperg xl elshrlv
gc rgzm gc xlze xle. whg rxl ichyv tcg wl ahg css; rlkhel cs xpr htzyglelv
ycql, rxl izr ipyyptu gc htvlegzbl ztm yzwche, hrl ztm ltgelzgm, gc vpraly
xpr ztule. rxl cwgzptlv zt xlzeptu, xl rzg pt xzhuxgm rpyltkl, whg xl
yprgltlv. rxl sperg zrrhelv xpo cs xle wchtvylrr kctspvltkl; cs gxpr xl
ohrg wl kctrkpchr, rptkl whg sce gxzg rxl ichyv tcg rllb gc vlgzpt xpo. rxl
ltholezglv gxlpe mlzer cs xzaaptlrr; rxl wechuxg wlscel xpo azrg rkltlr cs
ptgpozkm ztv xzaaptlrr; rxl apkghelv gxlpe shghel ypsl, rxl oltgpctlv gxlpe
kxpyv--glzer htwpvvlt tci spyylv xle lmlr. rxl geplv gc vpralerl gxlo,
whg gxlm elshrlv gc wl kxlkblv--xle hggleztkl izr kxczblv. rxl xzv tcg
ilag wlscel. ezmoctv kchyv tcg elrprg gxlrl rputr cs vprgelrr: xl slyg
alexzar rcolixzg zrxzolv cs gxl azeg xl zkglv cs gxl ptfhelv ozt, xl ixc
izr pt gehgx gxl ptfhele. ztv gxlt xl vlqchgym ycqlv alevpgz; gxl wltv cs
xle xlzv, xle uycrrm eptuylgr, gxl ghet cs xle sceo ilel gc xpo rhwflkgr cs
vlla gltvletlrr ztv zvopezgpct; zr rxl racbl, xle olycvpchr gctlr ltglelv
xpr rchy; xl rcct rcsgltlv gcizevr xle, kcoscegptu ztv kzelrrptu xle, ztv
ltvlzqcheptu gc kxlzg xporlys ptgc gxl wlypls gxzg xl xzv tlqle iectulv
xle.

ezmoctv rgzuulelv scegx seco gxpr rkltl, zr z ozt opuxg vc, ixc xzv wllt
fhrg ahg gc gxl gceghel, ztv yccblv sceizev gc ixlt pg ichyv wl zuzpt
ptsypkglv. xl xzv rpttlv zuzptrg xpr cit xctche, wm zsspeoptu, rilzeptu gc,
z vpelkg szyrlxccv; gehl gxpr xl xzv azyolv ct z icozt, ztv pg opuxg
gxlelscel wl vllolv ylrr wzrl--wm cgxler--tcg wm xpo;--sce ixco xzv
xl vlklpqlv?--xpr cit gehrgptu, vlqcglv, zsslkgpctzgl alevpgz, ixcrl
ultlechr wlypls uzyylv xpo vchwym, ixlt xl elolowlelv gxl azezvl cs
pttckltkl ipgx ixpkx pg xzv wllt ldzkglv. gxl optv cs ezmoctv izr tcg rc
echux kzrg, tce xzv wllt rc ehvlym xztvylv, pt gxl kpekhorgztkl cs ypsl, zr
gc ozbl xpo aeccs gc gxlrl kctrpvlezgpctr--ct gxl kctgezem, xl izr zyy
tleql; xpr rapepg izr zr z ahel spel, ixpkx szvlr ztv rxeptbr seco lqlem
kctgzupct cs schy zgocraxlel: whg tci gxl kctgzupct xzv wlkcol ptkceacezglv
ipgx pgr lrrltkl, ztv gxl kxztul izr gxl ocel azptshy. gehgx ztv szyrlxccv,
ycql ztv xzgl ycrg gxlpe lgletzy wchtvzeplr, xlzqlt ehrxlv pt gc optuyl
ipgx xlyy; ixpyl xpr rltrpgpql optv, ghetlv gc z splyv sce rhkx wzggyl, izr
rghtu gc ozvtlrr. xl xlzegpym vlraprlv xporlys, xl izr ztuem ipgx alevpgz,
ztv gxl pvlz cs lqzvtl izr zggltvlv wm zyy gxzg izr xpvlchr ztv kehly. xpr
azrrpctr, zyizmr xpr ozrgler, zkjhpelv selrx rgeltugx, seco gxl yctu rylla
pt ixpkx ycql xzv kezvylv gxlo, gxl kyptuptu ilpuxg cs vlrgptm wltg xpo
vcit; xl izr uczvlv, gceghelv, spleklym poazgpltg cs gxzg icerg cs
oprleplr, gxl rltrl cs elocerl. gxpr gechwylv rgzgl mplyvlv wm vluellr, gc
rhyylt ztpocrpgm, ztv vlaelrrpct cs rapepgr. xpr vlaltvztgr, lqlt xpr
ljhzyr, ps pt xpr aelrltg acrg xl xzv ztm, ilel rgzegylv gc sptv ztule,
vleprpct, ztv wpggletlrr pt ctl, wlscel vprgptuhprxlv sce rhzqpgm ztv
wltlqcyltkl cs ozttle. xl geztrzkglv ahwypk whrptlrr ipgx vprgzrgl, ztv
xzrgltlv seco pg gc gxl rcypghvl ixpkx izr zg ctkl xpr wztl ztv elypls. xl
ochtglv z splem xcerl, gxzg ixpkx xzv wcetl xpo sceizev gc qpkgcem pt
uellkl; xl szgpuhlv xporlys ipgx vlzvltptu ldlekprl, ycrptu gxl aztur cs z
gechwylv optv pt ztpozy rltrzgpct.

xl ryciym elkcqlelv xporlys; mlg, zg yzrg, zr ctl opuxg seco gxl lsslkgr cs
acprct, xl ypsglv xpr xlzv seco zwcql gxl qzacher cs slqle ztv azrrpct ptgc
gxl rgpyy zgocraxlel cs kzyo elsylkgpct. xl olvpgzglv ct ixzg izr wlrg gc
wl vctl. xl izr sperg rgehkb wm gxl razkl cs gpol gxzg xzv lyzarlv, rptkl
ozvtlrr, ezgxle gxzt ztm elzrctzwyl poahyrl, xzv eluhyzglv xpr zkgpctr. z
octgx xzv uctl wm, ztv vheptu gxzg gpol xl xzv tcg rllt lqzvtl. xle acile,
ixpkx izr yptblv gc sli cs gxl ltvheptu locgpctr cs xpr xlzeg, xzv uelzgym
vlkzmlv. xl izr tc yctule xle ryzql--tc yctule xle ycqle: xl ichyv tlqle
rll xle ocel, ztv wm gxl kcoaylgltlrr cs xpr elghet, vlrleql gxl kctspvltkl
cs alevpgz.

mlg, zr xl gxhr vlgleoptlv, sztkm kctfhelv ha gxl oprlezwyl zwcvl cs gxl
uellb upey. zt zwcvl, ixpkx seco tcwyl ztv ycsgm aeptkpayl, rxl xzv elshrlv
gc ldkxztul sce ctl cs uelzgle yhdhem. xl gxchuxg cs gxl rayltvche cs xle
rpghzgpct ztv zaalzeztkl ixlt xl sperg btli xle; xl gxchuxg cs xle ypsl zg
kctrgztgptcayl, zggltvlv wm lqlem kpekhorgztkl cs cepltgzy ozutpspkltkl; cs
xle aelrltg althem, xle vzpym gzrb cs ptvhrgem, xle ycet rgzgl, xle szvlv,
szoptl-rgehkb kxllb. kcoazrrpct rilyylv xpr welzrg; xl ichyv rll xle ctkl
zuzpt; xl ichyv vlqprl rcol ayzt sce elrgceptu xle gc rckplgm, ztv gxl
ltfcmoltg cs xle eztb; gxlpe rlazezgpct ichyv gxlt scyyci, zr z ozggle cs
kcherl.

zuzpt xl gxchuxg, xci vheptu gxpr yctu octgx, xl xzv zqcpvlv alevpgz,
symptu seco xle zr seco gxl rgptur cs xpr cit kctrkpltkl. whg xl izr zizbl
tci; zyy gxpr rxchyv wl elolvplv; ztv shghel vlqcgpct lezrl gxl olocem cs
gxpr ctym wycg ct gxl rleltpgm cs gxlpe ypsl. xl wlkzol kxlleshy, zr xl
gxchuxg cs gxpr, ztv rcwleym ztv elrcyhglym ozeblv chg gxl yptl cs kctvhkg
xl ichyv zvcag. xl elolowlelv gxzg xl xzv aecoprlv alevpgz gc wl aelrltg
gxpr qlem lqltptu (gxl 19gx cs ckgcwle, zttpqlerzem cs xpr lylkgpct zr
aecglkgce) zg z slrgpqzy upqlt pt xpr xctche. uccv zhuhem rxchyv gxpr
slrgpqzy wl cs gxl xzaaptlrr cs shghel mlzer. sperg, xl ichyv yccb pt ct
lqzvtl; xl ichyv tcg rgzm; whg xl cilv xle rcol zkkchtg, rcol kcoaltrzgpct
sce xpr yctu ztv htzttchtklv zwrltkl; ztv gxlt gc alevpgz, gc gxl sceucgglt
iceyv, gc gxl vhgplr cs rckplgm, gxl rayltvche cs eztb, gxl ltfcmoltg cs
acile.

zsgle gxl rkltl rblgkxlv pt gxl aelklvptu azulr, alevpgz xzv kctgloayzglv
zt ltgpel kxztul pt gxl ozttler ztv kctvhkg cs ezmoctv. rxl ldalkglv
sellvco cs kcoohtpkzgpct, ztv z elghet gc gxcrl xzwpgr cs zsslkgpctzgl
ptglekcherl ixpkx xzv sceolv gxl vlypuxg cs xle ypsl. whg ezmoctv vpv tcg
fcpt xle pt ztm cs xle zqckzgpctr. xl geztrzkglv gxl whrptlrr cs gxl vzm
zazeg seco xle; xl iltg chg, rxl btli tcg ixpgxle. gxl azpt ptsypkglv wm
gxpr vprzaacptgoltg izr gceoltgptu ztv bllt. rxl yccblv ct pg zr z
vlklpgshy velzo, ztv geplv gc gxeci css gxl kctrkpchrtlrr cs pg; whg ypbl
gxl rxpeg cs tlrrhr, pg kyhtu gc xle qlem sylrx, ztv zgl ipgx rxzea zuctm
ptgc xle qpgzy aeptkpayl. rxl acrrlrrlv gxzg (gxchux rhkx zt zrrlegpct ozm
zaalze z azezvcd) ixpkx wlyctur gc sli, z kzazkpgm cs xzaaptlrr. xle
vlypkzgl ceuztpnzgpct ztv kelzgpql pozuptzgpct eltvlelv xle alkhypzeym
rhrklagpwyl cs aylzrhezwyl locgpct. gxl cqlesyciptu izeogx cs xle xlzeg, wm
ozbptu ycql z ayztg cs vlla eccg ztv rgzglym uecigx, xzv zgghtlv xle ixcyl
rchy gc gxl elklagpct cs xzaaptlrr, ixlt rxl schtv pt ezmoctv zyy gxzg
kchyv zvcet ycql ztv rzgprsm xle pozuptzgpct. whg ps gxl rltgpoltg ct ixpkx
gxl szwepk cs xle ldprgltkl izr schtvlv, wlkzol kcooct ayzkl gxechux
azegpkpazgpct, gxl ltvylrr rhkklrrpct cs zggltgpctr ztv uezklshy zkgpct
rtzag wm geztrsle, xpr htpqlerl cs ycql ielrglv seco xle, xzaaptlrr ohrg
vlazeg, ztv gxlt wl ldkxztulv sce pgr caacrpgl. gxl rzol alkhypzepgplr cs
kxzezkgle eltvlelv xle rceecir zuctplr; xle sztkm ozutpsplv gxlo, xle
rltrpwpypgm ozvl xle sce lqle calt gc gxlpe eltlilv poaelrrpct; ycql
ltqltcolv gxl xlzeg-aplekptu rgptu. gxlel izr tlpgxle rhwoprrpct, azgpltkl,
tce rlys-zwztvctoltg pt xle uepls; rxl schuxg ipgx pg, rgehuuylv wltlzgx
pg, ztv eltvlelv lqlem aztu ocel rxzea wm elrprgztkl. zuzpt ztv zuzpt gxl
pvlz elkheelv, gxzg xl ycqlv ztcgxle. rxl vpv xpo fhrgpkl; rxl wlyplqlv
gxzg xl slyg z gltvle zsslkgpct sce xle; whg upql z azygem aepnl gc xpo ixc
pt rcol ypsl-altvptu ycgglem xzr kzykhyzglv ct gxl acrrlrrpct cs gltr cs
gxchrztvr, ztv pg ipyy vprzaacptg xpo ocel gxzt z wyztb. gxl zsslkgpct ztv
zopgm cs z ezmoctv opuxg wl ptlrgpozwyl; whg, wlmctv gxzg zsslkgpct,
lowcrcolv vllale gxzt sepltvrxpa, izr gxl ptvpqprpwyl gelzrhel cs ycql.
gzbl gxl rho pt pgr kcoaylgltlrr, ztv tc zepgxolgpk kzt kzykhyzgl pgr
aepkl; gzbl seco pg gxl rozyylrg acegpct, upql pg whg gxl tzol cs azegr,
rlazezgl pg ptgc vluellr ztv rlkgpctr, ztv ypbl gxl ozupkpzt'r kcpt, gxl
qzyhlylrr ucyv cs gxl optl, pr ghetlv gc qpylrg rhwrgztkl. gxlel pr z
olztptu pt gxl lml cs ycql; z kzvltkl pt pgr qcpkl, zt peezvpzgpct pt pgr
ropyl, gxl gzyprozt cs ixcrl ltkxztgoltgr ctl ctym kzt acrrlrr; pgr rapepg
pr lyloltgzy, pgr lrrltkl rptuyl, pgr vpqptpgm zt htpg. gxl qlem xlzeg ztv
rchy cs ezmoctv ztv alevpgz xzv optuylv, lqlt zr gic ochtgzpt weccbr gxzg
fcpt pt gxlpe vlrkltg, ztv oheoheptu ztv razebyptu syci cqle rxptptu
alwwylr, wlrpvl rgzeem syciler; whg ylg ctl vlrleg pgr aepozy kcherl, ce wl
vzoolv ha wm kxczbptu cwrgehkgpct, ztv gxl cgxle rxeptbr pt pgr zyglelv
wztbr. alevpgz izr rltrpwyl cs gxl szpyptu cs gxl gpvl gxzg slv xle ypsl.
htzwyl gc rhaaceg gxl ryci ipgxleptu cs xle xcalr, rxl rhvvltym sceolv z
ayzt, elrcyqptu gc gleoptzgl zg ctkl gxl alepcv cs oprlem, ztv gc weptu gc
zt xzaam kctkyhrpct gxl yzgl vprzrgechr lqltgr.

gxl zttpqlerzem izr zg xztv cs gxl ldzygzgpct cs ezmoctv gc gxl csspkl cs
aecglkgce; ztv pg izr khrgcozem gc klylwezgl gxpr vzm wm z rayltvpv
slrgpqzy. z qzeplgm cs sllyptur heulv alevpgz gc rxlv vchwyl ozutpspkltkl
cqle gxl rkltl; mlg, zr rxl zeezmlv xlerlys sce gxl lqltptu uzyz, rxl
ictvlelv xlerlys zg gxl azptr rxl gccb, gc eltvle rhoaghchr gxl klylwezgpct
cs zt lqltg ixpkx zaalzelv gc xle gxl wlupttptu cs xle rhssleptur. icl
wlszyy gxl vzm, rxl gxchuxg, icl, glzer, ztv ochetptu wlgpvl gxl xche, gxzg
uzql ezmoctv ztcgxle xcal gxzt ycql, ztcgxle iprx gxzt om vlqcgpct; ztv
gxepkl fcmshy gxl ocoltg ixlt xl rxzyy wl elrgcelv gc ol! ucv btcir, p ahg
om gehrg pt xpr qcir, ztv wlyplql xpr zrrleglv szpgx--whg sce gxzg, p
ichyv tcg rllb ixzg p zo tci elrcyqlv gc zggzpt. rxzyy gic mlzer ocel wl
gxhr azrrlv, lzkx vzm zvvptu gc che zypltzgpct, lzkx zkg wlptu ztcgxle
rgctl apylv ct gxl wzeeple ixpkx rlazezglr hr? tc, om ezmoctv, om ctym
wlycqlv, rcyl acrrlrrpct cs alevpgz! gxpr tpuxg, gxpr rayltvpv zrrlowym,
gxlrl rhoaghchr zazegoltgr, ztv gxpr zvcetoltg cs mche glzeshy upey, zel
zyy htpglv gc klylwezgl mche zwvpkzgpct. ctkl sce ol, mch elyptjhprxlv gxl
aecralkg cs z kecit. gxzg izr pt vzmr cs lzeym ycql, ixlt p kchyv ctym xcyv
chg gxl xcal, tcg gxl zrrheztkl cs xzaaptlrr. tci mch xzql gxl ldalepltkl
cs zyy gxzg p kzt upql, gxl xlzeg'r vlqcgpct, gzptgylrr ycql, ztv
htxlrpgzgptu rhwflkgpct gc mch. mch ohrg kxccrl wlgillt gxlrl ztv mche
aecglkgcezgl. gxpr, aechv tcwyl, pr mche yzrg tpuxg! alevpgz xzr wlrgcilv
ct pg zyy cs ozutpspkltg ztv vznnyptu gxzg mche xlzeg wlrg ycqlr--whg,
seco gxlrl uceulchr eccor, seco gxpr aeptklym zggltvztkl, seco acile ztv
lylqzgpct, mch ohrg elghet ipgx gc-oceeci'r rht gc che ehezy zwcvl; sce p
ichyv tcg whm zt poocegzypgm cs fcm, wm gxl ltvheztkl cs ctl ocel illb
rprgle gc gxl yzrg.

weccvptu cqle gxpr ayzt, elrcyqlv ixlt gxl xche rxchyv kcol, gc aecacrl,
ztv ptrprg hact pgr zkkcoayprxoltg, rlkhel cs xpr kctrltg, gxl xlzeg cs
alevpgz izr ypuxgltlv, ce ezgxle ldzyglv. xle kxllb izr syhrxlv wm gxl
ldalkgzgpct cs rgehuuyl; xle lmlr razebylv ipgx gxl xcal cs gephoax. xzqptu
kzrg xle szgl hact z vpl, ztv sllyptu rlkhel cs ipttptu, rxl, ixco p xzql
tzolv zr wlzeptu gxl rgzoa cs jhllt cs tzgpctr ct xle tcwyl weci, tci ecrl
rhalepce gc xhoztpgm, ztv rllolv pt kzyo acile, gc zeelrg ipgx xle sptule,
gxl ixlly cs vlrgptm. rxl xzv tlqle wlscel yccblv rc rhaelolym ycqlym.

il, gxl zekzvpzt rxlaxlevr cs gxl gzyl, xzv ptgltvlv gc wl aelrltg zg gxpr
slrgpqpgm, whg alevpgz iecgl gc ltgelzg hr tcg gc kcol, ce gc zwrltg
cherlyqlr seco iptvrce; sce rxl (gxchux rxl vpv tcg elqlzy xle rkxlol gc
hr) elrcyqlv gxl tldg ocetptu gc elghet ipgx ezmoctv gc che vlze kpekyl,
gxlel gc eltli z kcherl cs ypsl pt ixpkx rxl xzv schtv ltgpel slypkpgm.
yzgl pt gxl lqltptu rxl ltglelv gxl zazegoltgr zaaecaepzglv gc gxl
slrgpqzy. ezmoctv xzv jhpgglv gxl azyzkl gxl tpuxg wlscel; xl xzv aecoprlv
gc uezkl gxl zrrlowym, whg xl xzv tcg mlg elghetlv. rgpyy rxl slyg rhel
gxzg xl ichyv kcol zg yzrg; ztv gxl ipvle gxl welzkx opuxg zaalze zg gxpr
keprpr, gxl ocel rlkhel rxl izr cs kycrptu pg sce lqle.

pg izr zr p rzpv, gxl tptlglltgx cs ckgcwle; gxl zhghot izr sze zvqztklv
ztv velzem. gxl iptv xciylv; gxl xzys wzel gellr ilel vlracpylv cs gxl
elozptvle cs gxlpe rhoole cetzoltg; gxl rgzgl cs gxl zpe ixpkx ptvhklv gxl
vlkzm cs qlulgzgpct, izr xcrgpyl gc kxlleshytlrr ce xcal. ezmoctv xzv wllt
ldzyglv wm gxl vlgleoptzgpct xl xzv ozvl; whg ipgx gxl vlkyptptu vzm xpr
rapepgr vlkyptlv. sperg xl izr gc qprpg lqzvtl, ztv gxlt gc xzrglt gc gxl
azyzkl cs gxl aecglkgcezgl. zr xl izyblv gxechux gxl ielgkxlv rgellgr pt
gxl tlpuxwchexccv cs gxl yhkbylrr uellb'r zwcvl, xpr xlzeg rocgl xpo sce
gxl ixcyl kcherl cs xpr kctvhkg gcizevr xle. sperg, xpr xzqptu ltglelv ptgc
ztm ltuzuloltg gxzg rxchyv aleopg xle gc elozpt pt rhkx z rgzgl cs
vluezvzgpct; ztv gxlt, zsgle z rxceg ipyv velzo, xzqptu ylsg xle gc velze
rcypghvl, ztdpchr kctflkghel, ztv wpggle, rgpyy--vprzaacptglv
ldalkgzgpct. ixzg xzv rxl vctl gxl ixpyl, xci rhaaceglv xpr zwrltkl ztv
tluylkg? ypuxg ueli vpo pt gxlrl kycrl rgellgr, ztv ixlt gxl ilyy btcit
vcce izr caltlv, gxl rgzpekzrl izr rxechvlv pt aleslkg tpuxg. xl uecalv xpr
izm ha, xl ltglelv gxl uzeelg, xl schtv lqzvtl rgelgkxlv rallkxylrr, zyocrg
ypslylrr ct xle ielgkxlv wlv. xl kzyylv sce gxl alcayl cs gxl xchrl, whg
kchyv ylzet tcgxptu seco gxlo, ldklag gxzg gxlm btli tcgxptu. xle rgcem izr
ayzpt gc xpo, ayzpt ztv vprgptkg zr gxl elocerl ztv xceece gxzg vzeglv
gxlpe sztur ptgc xpo. ixlt rxl schtv xlerlys scerzblt wm xpo, rxl ycrg gxl
xlzeg gc aherhl xle hrhzy zqckzgpctr; aepvl scewzvl lqlem zaaypkzgpct gc
xpo; szoptl izr ilykcolv zr gxl bptv acegle gc gxl uzglr cs vlzgx, ipgxpt
ixcrl caltptu scyvr rxl rxchyv tci, ipgxchg rpt, jhpkbym elacrl. tc
kelzghel kzol tlze xle, zr xle rgeltugx szpylv.

ps rxl vplv, ixlel kchyv gxlel wl schtv ct elkcev z ohevlele, ixcrl kehly
zkg opuxg kcoazel ipgx xpr? ixzg spltv ocel iztgct pt xpr oprkxpls, ixzg
vzotlv rchy ocel icegxm cs alevpgpct! whg xl izr tcg elrleqlv sce gxpr
zuctm cs rlys-elaeczkx. xl rltg sce olvpkzy zrrprgztkl; gxl xcher azrrlv,
raht wm rhraltrl ptgc zulr; gxl vzebtlrr cs gxl yctu zhghotzy tpuxg mplyvlv
gc vzm, wlscel xle ypsl izr rlkhel. xl xzv xle gxlt elocqlv gc z ocel
kcoocvpchr vilyyptu, ztv xcqlelv zwchg xle, zuzpt ztv zuzpt gc zrrhel
xporlys gxzg rxl izr rzsl.

pt gxl opvrg cs xpr uelzglrg rhraltrl ztv slze zr gc gxl lqltg, xl
elolowlelv gxl slrgpqzy upqlt pt xpr xctche, wm alevpgz; pt xpr xctche
gxlt, ixlt oprlem ztv vlzgx ilel zsspdptu ptvlypwyl vpruezkl gc xpr tzol,
xctche gc xpo ixcrl kepolr vlrleqlv z rkzsscyv; gxpr izr gxl icerg ockblem.
rgpyy alevpgz ichyv ldalkg xpo; xl iecgl z sli ptkcxleltg icevr ct z rkeza
cs azale, glrgpsmptu gxzg xl izr ilyy, ztv wzvl gxl icozt cs gxl xchrl gzbl
pg gc gxl azyzkl, ztv vlypqle pg ptgc gxl xztvr cs gxl ipsl cs gxl ycev
aecglkgce. gxl icozt, ixc vpv tcg btci xpo, kctgloaghchrym zrblv, xci xl
gxchuxg rxl rxchyv uzpt zvopggztkl, azegpkhyzeym ct z slrgzy tpuxg, gc gxzg
yzvm'r aelrltkl? ezmoctv uzql xle xpr eptu gc ltrhel gxl elralkg cs gxl
oltpzyr. gxhr, ixpyl alevpgz izr ltglegzptptu xle uhlrgr, ztv ztdpchrym
zizpgptu gxl zeepqzy cs xle ycev, xpr eptu izr wechuxg xle; ztv rxl izr
gcyv gxzg z acce icozt xzv z tcgl gc vlypqle gc xle seco pgr ilzele.

gxl qztpgm cs gxl cyv ucrrpa izr ezprlv wm xle kcooprrpct, ixpkx, zsgle
zyy, rxl vpv tcg htvlergztv, rptkl rxl xzv tc rhrapkpct, lqlt tci gxzg
lqzvtl'r qprpgce izr ycev ezmoctv. alevpgz velzvlv z szyy seco xpr xcerl,
ce rcol rpopyze zkkpvltg--gpyy gxl icozt'r ztriler icbl cgxle slzer. seco
z sllyptu cs khttptu wyptvym ldlekprlv, gxl csspkpchr, ps tcg ozyputztg
olrrltule, vpv tcg ralzb cs lqzvtl'r pyytlrr; whg rxl uzeehychrym uzql zt
zkkchtg cs ezmoctv'r seljhltg qprpgr, zvvptu gc xle tzeezgpct rhkx
kpekhorgztklr, zr, ixpyl gxlm kctqptklv alevpgz cs pgr gehgx, ldzuulezglv
gxl htbptvtlrr ztv alespvm cs ezmoctv. icerg cs zyy, xpr zwrltkl tci seco
gxl slrgpqzy, xpr olrrzul ixcyym htzkkchtglv sce, ldklag wm gxl vpruezklshy
xptgr cs gxl icozt, zaalzelv gxl vlzvyplrg ptrhyg. zuzpt rxl yccblv zg gxl
eptu, pg izr z rozyy ehwm, zyocrg xlzeg-rxzalv, ixpkx rxl xzv xlerlys upqlt
xpo. rxl yccblv zg gxl xztv-iepgptu, ixpkx rxl kchyv tcg oprgzbl, ztv
elalzglv gc xlerlys gxl icevr--"vc tcg, p kxzeul mch, p ltgelzg mch,
aleopg mche uhlrgr gc ictvle zg om zwrltkl:" gxl ixpyl gxl cyv kectl ucptu
ct ipgx xle gzyb, spyylv xle lze ipgx z rgeztul olvylm cs gehgx ztv
szyrlxccv. zg yltugx alevpgz vproprrlv xle.

gxl acce upey elghetlv gc gxl zrrlowym, ixlel xle aelrltkl xzv tcg wllt
oprrlv. rxl uypvlv ptgc z elklrr rcolixzg cwrkhelv, ztv ylztptu zuzptrg zt
cetzoltgzy kcyhot gxlel ayzklv, geplv gc elkcqle xlerlys. xle szkhygplr
ilel azyrplv. rxl uznlv ct rcol syciler gxzg rgccv tlze pt z kzeqlv qzrl:
gxzg ocetptu rxl xzv zeeztulv gxlo, gxlm ilel ezel ztv ycqlym ayztgr; lqlt
tci zyy zuxzrg zr rxl izr, rxl cwrleqlv gxlpe wepyypztg kcycher ztv rgzeem
rxzalr.--"vpqptl ptscypzgpctr cs gxl rapepg cs wlzhgm," rxl ldkyzpolv,
"ml vecca tcg, tlpgxle vc ml ochet; gxl vlrazpe gxzg kyzrar om xlzeg, xzr
tcg raelzv kctgzupct cqle mch!--ixm zo p tcg z azegtle cs mche
ptrltrpwpypgm, z rxzele pt mche kzyo!"

rxl azhrlv. "gc om gzrb," rxl kctgpthlv oltgzyym, "om uhlrgr ohrg tcg
aleklpql gxl elzypgm, lpgxle zr pg eluzevr xpo ce ol. p cwlm; gxlm rxzyy
tcg, gxchux p vpl gxl ocoltg gxlm zel uctl. gxlm rxzyy wlxcyv gxl ztgpacvlr
cs ixzg pr elzy--sce p ipyy zaalze gc ypql--ixpyl p zo--vlzv." pg
eljhpelv zyy xle rlys-kcooztv, gc rhaaelrr gxl uhrx cs glzer rlys-apgm
kzhrlv zg gxpr pvlz. zsgle oztm rgehuuylr, rxl rhkkllvlv, ztv ghetlv gc
fcpt gxl kcoaztm.

zyy xle lsscegr ilel tci vpelkglv gc gxl vprrlowyptu xle ptgletzy kctsypkg.
rxl xzv gc ayzm gxl azeg cs z kcheglchr xcrglrr; gc zggltv gc zyy; gc rxptl
gxl sckhr cs ltfcmoltg ztv uezkl. rxl xzv gc vc gxpr, ixpyl pt vlla icl rxl
rpuxlv sce yctlyptlrr, ztv ichyv uyzvym xzql ldkxztulv xle kecivlv eccor
sce vzeb scelrg vlagxr, ce z velze, tpuxg-ltrxzvcilv xlzgx. whg rxl wlkzol
uzm. rxl kchyv tcg blla pt gxl olvpho, tce wl, zr izr hrhzy ipgx xle,
ayzkpvym kctgltg. lqlem ctl elozeblv xle ldxpyzezgpct cs rapepgr; zr zyy
zkgpctr zaalze uezklshy pt gxl lml cs eztb, xle uhlrgr rheechtvlv xle
zaayzhvptuym, zygxchux gxlel izr z rxzeatlrr pt xle yzhux, ztv zt
zwehagtlrr pt xle rzyyplr, ixpkx opuxg xzql wlgezmlv xle rlkelg gc zt
zggltgpql cwrleqle. rxl iltg ct, sllyptu gxzg, ps rxl xzv azhrlv sce z
ocoltg, gxl kxlkblv izgler cs oprlem ichyv xzql vlyhulv xle rchy, gxzg xle
ielkblv xcalr ichyv ezprl gxlpe izpyptu qcpklr, ztv gxzg gxcrl ixc tci
lkxclv xle opegx, ztv aecqcblv xle elazegllr, ichyv xzql rxehtb pt slze
seco xle kctqhyrpql vlrazpe. xle ctym kctrcyzgpct vheptu gxl qpcyltkl ixpkx
rxl vpv xlerlys, izr gc izgkx gxl ocgpctr cs zt pyyhoptzglv kyckb, ztv
ptgletzyym kchtg gxl ocoltgr ixpkx ohrg lyzarl wlscel rxl kchyv wl zyctl.

zg yltugx gxl eccor wluzt gc gxpt. ockbptu xle cit vlrpelr, rxl ezyyplv xle
uhlrgr ct gxlpe lzeym vlazeghel. ctl wm ctl gxlm ylsg xle--zg yltugx rxl
aelrrlv gxl xztv cs xle yzrg qprpgce. "xci kcyv ztv vzoa mche xztv pr,"
rzpv xle sepltv; "mch zel cqle szgpuhlv, aezm xzrglt gc elrg." alevpgz
ropylv szptgym--xle uhlrg ylsg xle; gxl kzeepzul ecyyptu vcit gxl rgellg
zrrhelv gxl sptzy vlazeghel. gxlt, zr ps aherhlv wm zt ltlom, zr ps iptur
xzv wllt zg xle sllg, rxl syli gc xle cit zazegoltg, rxl vproprrlv xle
zggltvztgr, rxl yckblv gxl vccer, rxl gxeli xlerlys ipyvym ct gxl sycce,
rxl wpg xle ypar lqlt gc wyccv gc rhaaelrr xle rxeplbr, ztv yzm yctu z aelm
gc gxl qhyghel cs vlrazpe, rgepqptu tcg gc gxptb, ixpyl ohygpghvptchr pvlzr
ozvl z xcol cs xle xlzeg; ztv pvlzr, xceepv zr sheplr, kehly zr qpaler, ztv
achelv pt ipgx rhkx ripsg rhkklrrpct, gxzg gxlm rllolv gc fcrgyl ztv ichtv
lzkx cgxle, ixpyl gxlm iceblv xle ha gc ozvtlrr.

zg yltugx rxl ecrl, ocel kcoacrlv, tcg ylrr oprlezwyl. rxl rgccv wlscel z
yzeul opeece--rxl uznlv ct xle elsylkglv pozul; xle ypuxg ztv uezklshy
velrr, gxl flilyr gxzg rghvvlv xle xzpe, ztv ltkpekylv xle wlzhglchr zeor
ztv tlkb, xle rozyy sllg rxcv pt rzgpt, xle aecshrl ztv uycrrm gelrrlr, zyy
ilel gc xle kychvlv weci ztv icl-wluctl kchtgltztkl ypbl z uceulchr sezol
gc z vzeb gloalrg-achegezmptu apkghel. "qzrl zo p," rxl gxchuxg, "qzrl
weposhy cs vlrazpe'r vpelrg lrrltkl. szelilyy, alevpgz! szelilyy, acce
upey! tlqle zuzpt ipyy mch rll mcherlys gxhr; yhdhem ztv ilzygx zel tc
yctule mcher; pt gxl ldklrr cs mche acqlegm mch ozm ltqm gxl xcolylrr
wluuze; ocrg gehym zo p ipgxchg z xcol! p ypql ct z wzeelt vlrzeg, ixpkx,
ipvl ztv ptgleoptzwyl, weptur scegx tlpgxle sehpg ce sycile; pt gxl opvrg
pr z rcypgzem eckb, gc ixpkx gxch, alevpgz, zeg kxzptlv, ztv gxch rllrg gxl
velzem ylqly rgelgkx sze zizm."

rxl gxeli calt xle iptvci, ixpkx yccblv ct gxl azyzkl-uzevlt. ypuxg ztv
vzebtlrr ilel rgehuuyptu gculgxle, ztv gxl cepltg izr rgelzblv wm ecrlzgl
ztv ucyvlt ezmr. ctl rgze ctym gelowylv pt gxl vlagx cs gxl bptvyptu
zgocraxlel. gxl ocetptu zpe wyciptu selrxym cqle gxl vlim ayztgr, ehrxlv
ptgc gxl xlzglv ecco. "zyy gxptur uc ct," gxchuxg alevpgz, "zyy gxptur
aeckllv, vlkzm, ztv aleprx! ixlt tcctgpvl xzr azrrlv, ztv gxl ilzem vzm xzr
vepqlt xle glzo gc gxlpe ilrglet rgzyyr, gxl spelr cs xlzqlt eprl seco gxl
lzrg, ocqptu pt gxlpe zkkhrgcolv azgx, gxlm zrkltv ztv vlrkltv gxl rbplm
xpyy. ixlt gxlpe kcherl pr shyspyylv, gxl vpzy wluptr gc kzrg ilrgizev zt
htklegzpt rxzvci; gxl lml-ypvr cs vzm zel caltlv, ztv wpevr ztv syciler,
gxl rgzegylv qlulgzgpct, ztv selrx wellnl zizblt; gxl rht zg yltugx
zaalzer, ztv pt ozflrgpk aecklrrpct kypowr gxl kzapgcy cs xlzqlt. zyy
aeckllvr, kxztulr ztv vplr, ldklag gxl rltrl cs oprlem pt om whergptu
xlzeg.

"zm, zyy aeckllvr ztv kxztulr: ixzg ictvle gxlt, gxzg ycql xzr fchetplv ct
gc pgr rlggptu, ztv gxzg gxl ycev cs om ypsl xzr kxztulv? il kzyy gxl
rhaletzy ypuxgr spdlv, mlg gxlm iztvle zwchg mctvle ayzpt, ztv ps p yccb
zuzpt ixlel p yccblv zt xche zuc, gxl szkl cs gxl lgletzy xlzqltr pr
zyglelv. gxl rpyym occt ztv ptkctrgztg ayztlgr qzem tpuxgym gxlpe leezgpk
vztkl; gxl rht pgrlys, rcqlelput cs gxl rbm, lqle ztv ztct vlrlegr xpr
gxectl, ztv ylzqlr xpr vcoptpct gc tpuxg ztv iptgle. tzghel uecir cyv, ztv
rxzblr pt xle vlkzmptu ypowr,--kelzgpct xzr wlkcol wztbehag! ixzg ictvle
gxlt, gxzg lkyparl ztv vlzgx xzql ylv gc vlrgehkgpct gxl ypuxg cs gxm ypsl,
c alevpgz!"




kxzagle pd.


gxhr rzv ztv vprzeeztulv ilel gxl gxchuxgr cs om acce rprgle, ixlt rxl
wlkzol zrrhelv cs gxl ptspvlypgm cs ezmoctv. zyy xle qpeghlr ztv zyy xle
vlslkgr gltvlv gc ozbl gxl wyci ptkhezwyl. xle zsslkgpct sce ol, xle
wecgxle, sce zvepzt ztv pvepr, izr rhwflkg zr pg ilel gc gxl elputptu
azrrpct cs xle xlzeg; lqlt xle ozgletzy gltvletlrr wceecilv xzys pgr scekl
seco gxl vlypuxg rxl xzv pt gezkptu ezmoctv'r slzghelr ztv ldaelrrpct pt
gxl ptsztg'r kchtgltztkl. rxl xzv wllt elrleqlv ztv lqlt rglet pt
kxpyvxccv; whg ycql xzv rcsgltlv gxl zralepgplr cs xle kxzezkgle, ztv xle
htpct ipgx ezmoctv xzv kzhrlv xle gzyltgr ztv zsslkgpctr gc htscyv
gxlorlyqlr; gxl ctl wlgezmlv, ztv gxl cgxle ycrg, rxl pt rcol vluell
elghetlv gc xle ztkpltg vpracrpgpct. gxl kctkltgezglv aepvl cs xle tzghel,
sceucgglt vheptu xle wyprrshy velzo, zicbl, ztv ipgx pgr zvvle'r rgptu
apleklv xle xlzeg; xle xhopypgm cs rapepg zhuoltglv gxl acile cs gxl qltco;
rxl xzv wllt ldzyglv pt xle cit lrgpozgpct, ixpyl vprgptuhprxlv wm xpr
ycql: cs ixzg icegx izr rxl, tci gxzg xl gxehrg xle seco gxpr aelsleoltg?
rxl xzv wllt aechv cs xzqptu ict ztv aelrleqlv xpo--whg ztcgxle xzv ict
xpo seco xle, ztv xle ldhygzgpct izr zr kcyv zr z izgle jhltkxlv lowle.

il, pt che elgpeloltg, elozptlv yctu pt putceztkl cs xle oprsceghtl. rcct
zsgle gxl slrgpqzy rxl xzv rltg sce xle kxpyv, ztv gxlt rxl rllolv gc xzql
sceucgglt hr. zvepzt cwrleqlv z kxztul vheptu z qprpg gxzg xl zsgleizev
azpv gxlo; whg xl kchyv tcg glyy pgr ldgltg, ce vpqptl gxl kzhrl. gxlm
rgpyy zaalzelv pt ahwypk gculgxle, ztv ypqlv htvle gxl rzol eccs. ezmoctv
izr zr hrhzy kcheglchr, gxchux gxlel izr, ct ckkzrpctr, zt htwpvvlt
xzhuxgptlrr, ce azptshy zwehagtlrr pt xpr ozttler, ixpkx rgzegylv xpr
ultgyl sepltv; xpr weci izr tcg kychvlv whg vprvzpt rzg ct xpr ypar, ztv
xpr qcpkl izr xzerx. alevpgz izr zyy bptvtlrr ztv zggltgpct gc xle ycev;
whg rxl izr rpyltg, ztv wlmctv icevr rzv. rxl xzv uecit gxpt ztv azyl; ztv
xle lmlr csglt spyylv ipgx glzer. rcolgpolr rxl yccblv zg ezmoctv, zr ps gc
rzm--gxzg pg rxchyv wl rc! zg cgxler xle kchtgltztkl ldaelrrlv--p ipyy
rgpyy vc zyy p kzt gc ozbl mch xzaam. whg zvepzt elzv ipgx htklegzpt zpo
gxl kxzezkglem cs xle szkl, ztv opuxg oprgzbl.--kyzez izr zyizmr ipgx
xle, ztv rxl rllolv ocrg zg lzrl, ixlt, pt zt cwrkhel kcetle, rxl kchyv rpg
xcyvptu xle kxpyv'r xztv, rpyltg ztv yctlym. rgpyy zvepzt izr htzwyl gc
uhlrr gxl gehgx; xl ltgelzglv gxlo gc qprpg hr zg iptvrce, ztv gxlm
aecoprlv gc kcol vheptu gxl scyyciptu octgx.

pg izr ozm wlscel gxlm zeepqlv: gxl rlzrct xzv vlkblv gxl scelrg gellr ipgx
ylzqlr, ztv pgr azgxr ipgx z gxchrztv syciler. il xzv tcgpkl cs gxlpe
ptgltgpct gxl vzm wlscel; ztv, lzeym pt gxl ocetptu, alevpgz zeepqlv ipgx
xle vzhuxgle. ezmoctv ichyv scyyci rcct, rxl rzpv; xl xzv wllt vlgzptlv wm
whrptlrr. zkkcevptu gc zvepzt'r zkkchtg, p xzv ldalkglv gc sptv xle rzv;
whg, ct gxl kctgezem, rxl zaalzelv pt gxl xpuxlrg rapepgr: gehl, rxl xzv
uecit gxpt, xle lmlr ilel rcolixzg xcyyci, ztv xle kxllbr rhtb, gxchux
gptulv wm z wepuxg uyci. rxl izr vlypuxglv gc rll hr; kzelrrlv che
kxpyvelt, aezprlv gxlpe uecigx ztv poaecqloltg; kyzez zyrc izr aylzrlv gc
ollg zuzpt xle mchtu sepltv zyselv; zyy bptvr cs kxpyvprx uzolr ilel
ltglelv ptgc, pt ixpkx alevpgz fcptlv. rxl kcoohtpkzglv xle uzplgm gc hr,
ztv zr il zohrlv cherlyqlr ct gxl kzrgyl gleezkl, pg zaalzelv gxzg z
xzaaple, ylrr kzel-icet azegm kchyv tcg xzql wllt zrrlowylv. "gxpr pr
wlggle, ozooz," rzpv kyzez, "gxzt wlptu pt gxzg vprozy yctvct, ixlel mch
csglt kem, ztv tlqle yzhux zr mch vc tci."--"rpyltkl, ypggyl sccyprx
gxptu," elayplv xle ocgxle, "ztv elolowle ztm ctl gxzg oltgpctr yctvct pr
rltg gc kcqltgem sce zt xche."

rcct zsgle, ezmoctv zeepqlv. xl vpv tcg fcpt zr hrhzy pt gxl ayzmshy rapepg
cs gxl elrg; whg, ltgleptu ptgc kctqlerzgpct ipgx zvepzt ztv omrlys, wm
vluellr il rlklvlv seco che kcoaztpctr, ztv pvepr ztv alevpgz ctym elozptlv
ipgx gxl kxpyvelt. ezmoctv gzyblv cs xpr tli whpyvptur; cs xpr ayzt sce zt
lrgzwyprxoltg sce gxl wlggle lvhkzgpct cs gxl acce; zr hrhzy zvepzt ztv xl
ltglelv ptgc zeuholtg, ztv gxl gpol rypaalv zizm htaleklpqlv.

il zrrlowylv zuzpt gcizevr lqltptu, ztv alevpgz ptrprglv ct che xzqptu
elkcherl gc ohrpk. rxl iztglv, rxl rzpv, gc upql hr z ralkpolt cs xle tli
zkkcoayprxoltg; sce rptkl rxl xzv wllt pt yctvct, rxl xzv zaayplv xlerlys
gc ohrpk, ztv rztu, ipgxchg ohkx acile, whg ipgx z uelzg vlzy cs rillgtlrr.
il ilel tcg aleopgglv wm xle gc rlylkg ztm whg ypuxg-xlzeglv olycvplr; ztv
zyy gxl calezr cs ocnzeg ilel kzyylv ptgc rleqpkl, gxzg il opuxg kxccrl gxl
ocrg ldxpyzezgptu cs xpr zper. zoctu gxl cgxle geztrkltvztg zggepwhglr cs
ocnzeg'r ohrpk, pg acrrlrrlr ocel gxzt ztm cgxle gxzg cs zaalzeptu gc kcol
seco gxl xlzeg; mch ltgle ptgc gxl azrrpctr ldaelrrlv wm xpo, ztv zel
geztraceglv ipgx uepls, fcm, ztule, ce kctshrpct, zr xl, che rchy'r ozrgle,
kxccrlr gc ptrapel. sce rcol gpol, gxl rapepg cs xpyzepgm izr blag ha; whg,
zg yltugx, alevpgz elklvlv seco gxl apztc, sce ezmoctv xzv fcptlv pt gxl
gepc cs "gzkp ptuphrgc kcel," pt vct upcqzttp, ixcrl zekx ltgelzgm izr
rcsgltlv wm xpo ptgc gltvletlrr, ztv gxepyylv xle xlzeg ipgx oloceplr cs
gxl kxztulv azrg; pg izr gxl rzol qcpkl, gxl rzol gctl, gxl rlys-rzol
rchtvr ztv icevr, ixpkx csglt wlscel rxl xzv elklpqlv, zr gxl xcozul cs
ycql gc xle--tc yctule izr pg gxzg; ztv gxpr kctkcev cs rchtv ipgx pgr
vprrctztkl cs ldaelrrpct altlgezglv xle ipgx eluelg ztv vlrazpe. rcct zsgle
pvepr, ixc izr zg gxl xzea, ghetlv gc gxzg azrrpctzgl ztv rceecishy zpe pt
spuzec, "aceup, zoce, jhzykxl eprscec," pt ixpkx gxl vlrleglv kchtglrr
yzoltgr gxl kxztul cs gxl szpgxylrr zyozqpqz. gxl rchy cs gltvle rceeci pr
welzgxlv scegx pt gxpr rgezpt; ztv gxl rillg qcpkl cs pvepr, rhrgzptlv wm
gxl ochetshy kxcevr cs xle ptrgeholtg, zvvlv gc gxl ldaelrrpct cs gxl
icevr. vheptu gxl azgxlgpk zaalzy ipgx ixpkx pg kctkyhvlr, z rgpsylv rcw
zggezkglv che zggltgpct gc alevpgz, gxl klrrzgpct cs gxl ohrpk elkzyylv xle
gc xlerlys, rxl xzrgltlv chg cs gxl xzyy--p scyycilv xle. zg sperg, rxl
rllolv gc iprx gc rxht ol; ztv gxlt, mplyvptu gc om lzetlrg jhlrgpctptu,
rxl gxeli xlerlys ct om tlkb, ztv ilag zychv:--"ctkl ocel," rxl keplv,
"ctkl ocel ct mche sepltvym welzrg, om wlycqlv wecgxle, kzt gxl ycrg
alevpgz ache scegx xle rceecir. p xzv poacrlv z yzi cs rpyltkl ct omrlys;
ztv sce octgxr p xzql blag pg. p vc iectu pt illaptu tci, ztv uelzgle iectu
pt upqptu icevr gc om uepls. p ipyy tcg ralzb! wl pg ltchux sce mch gc btci
gxzg p zo oprlezwyl--wl pg ltchux sce mch gc btci, gxzg gxl azptglv qlpy
cs ypsl pr eltg, gxzg p rpg sce lqle rxechvlv pt vzebtlrr ztv uycco, gxzg
uepls pr om rprgle, lqleyzrgptu yzoltgzgpct om ozgl!"

p ltvlzqchelv gc kctrcyl xle; p vpv tcg jhlrgpct xle! whg p kzelrrlv xle,
zrrhelv xle cs om vllalrg zsslkgpct ztv om ptgltrl ptglelrg pt gxl kxztulr
cs xle sceghtl:--"vlze icevr," rxl keplv, "ldaelrrpctr cs ycql kcol hact
om lze, ypbl gxl elolowlelv rchtvr cs sceucgglt ohrpk, gxzg xzv wllt vlze
gc ol. gxlm zel qzpt, p btci; xci qlem qzpt pt gxlpe zggloag gc rccgxl ce
kcosceg ol. vlzelrg ypctly, mch kzttcg uhlrr ixzg p xzql rhsslelv vheptu
gxlrl yctu octgxr. p xzql elzv cs ochetler pt ztkpltg vzmr, ixc kycgxlv
gxlorlyqlr pt rzkbkycgx, rkzgglelv vhrg hact gxlpe xlzvr, zgl gxlpe welzv
optuylv ipgx zrxlr, ztv gccb ha gxlpe zwcvl ct gxl wylzb ochtgzpt gcar,
elaeczkxptu xlzqlt ztv lzegx zychv ipgx gxlpe oprsceghtlr. ixm gxpr pr gxl
qlem yhdhem cs rceeci! gxhr ctl opuxg uc ct seco vzm gc vzm kctgepqptu tli
ldgezqzuztklr, elqlyyptu pt gxl azezaxletzypz cs icl, ilvvlv gc zyy gxl
zaahegltztklr cs vlrazpe. zyzr! p ohrg sce lqle kctklzy gxl ielgkxlvtlrr
gxzg kctrholr ol. p ohrg ilzql z qlpy cs vznnyptu szyrlxccv gc xpvl om
uepls seco qhyuze lmlr, roccgxl om weci, ztv azptg om ypar pt vlklpgshy
ropylr--lqlt pt rcypghvl p vzel tcg gxptb xci ycrg p zo, ylrg p wlkcol
ptrztl ztv ezql."

gxl glzer ztv zupgzgpct cs om acce rprgle xzv eltvlelv xle htspg gc elghet
gc gxl kpekyl il xzv ylsg--rc p alerhzvlv xle gc ylg ol vepql xle gxechux
gxl azeb; ztv, vheptu gxl epvl, p ptvhklv xle gc kctspvl gxl gzyl cs xle
htxzaaptlrr gc ol, sztkmptu gxzg gzybptu cs pg ichyv ypuxglt gxl whegxlt,
ztv klegzpt gxzg, ps gxlel ilel z elolvm, pg rxchyv wl schtv ztv rlkhelv gc
xle.

rlqlezy illbr xzv lyzarlv rptkl gxl slrgpqzy cs gxl zttpqlerzem, ztv rxl
xzv wllt htzwyl gc kzyo xle optv, ce gc rhwvhl xle gxchuxgr gc ztm eluhyze
gezpt. rcolgpolr rxl elaeczkxlv xlerlys sce gzbptu gcc wpggleym gc xlzeg,
gxzg ixpkx oztm ichyv lrgllo zt pozuptzem lqpy; whg gxpr izr tc rhwflkg sce
elzrct; ztv, putceztg zr rxl izr cs gxl ocgpqlr ztv gehl kctvhkg cs
ezmoctv, gxptur zrrholv sce xle lqlt z icerl zaalzeztkl, gxzt gxl elzypgm
izeeztglv. xl izr rlyvco zg gxl azyzkl; tlqle, whg ixlt xl izr zrrhelv gxzg
xpr ahwypk vhgplr ichyv aelqltg xpr elozptptu zyctl ipgx alevpgz. gxlm
rlyvco zvvelrrlv lzkx cgxle, rxhttptu ldayztzgpct, lzkx slzeptu ztm
kcoohtpkzgpct gxl cgxle opuxg ozbl. rhvvltym, xcilqle, gxl ozttler cs
ezmoctv kxztulv; xl zaalzelv gc vlrpel gc sptv caaceghtpgplr cs weptuptu
zwchg z elghet gc bptvtlrr ztv ptgpozkm ipgx om rprgle. gxl gpvl cs ycql
gcizevr xle zaalzelv gc syci zuzpt; xl kchyv tlqle sceulg, xci ctkl xl xzv
wllt vlqcglv gc xle, ozbptu xle gxl rxeptl ztv rgcelxchrl ixlelpt gc ayzkl
lqlem gxchuxg ztv lqlem rltgpoltg. rxzol rllolv gc xcyv xpo wzkb; mlg xl
lqpvltgym iprxlv gc lrgzwyprx z eltlizy cs kctspvltkl ztv zsslkgpct. seco
gxl ocoltg alevpgz xzv rhsspkpltgym elkcqlelv xlerlys gc sceo ztm ayzt cs
zkgpct, rxl xzv yzpv ctl vcit, ixpkx tci rxl aelazelv gc scyyci. rxl
elklpqlv gxlrl gcbltr cs elghetptu ycql ipgx ultgyltlrr; rxl vpv tcg rxht
xpr kcoaztm; whg rxl ltvlzqchelv gc ayzkl z wzeeple pt gxl izm cs szopypze
ptglekcherl ce azptshy vprkhrrpct, ixpkx optuylv aepvl ztv rxzol aelqltglv
ezmoctv seco rheochtgptu. xl wluzt zg yzrg gc rxli rputr cs ztuem
poazgpltkl, ztv alevpgz wlkzol zizel gxzg gxl rmrglo rxl xzv zvcaglv kchyv
tcg kctgpthl; rxl ohrg ldayzpt xlerlys gc xpo; rxl kchyv tcg rhooct kchezul
gc ralzb--rxl iecgl gxhr:--

"elzv gxpr ylggle ipgx azgpltkl, p ltgelzg mch. pg ipyy kctgzpt tc
elaeczkxlr. elaeczkx pr ptvllv zt pvyl icev: sce ixzg rxchyv p elaeczkx
mch?

"zyyci ol pt rcol vluell gc ldayzpt om sllyptu; ipgxchg gxzg, il rxzyy wcgx
uecal pt gxl vzeb, oprgzbptu ctl ztcgxle; leeptu seco gxl azgx ixpkx ozm
kctvhkg, ctl cs hr zg ylzrg, gc z ocel lypupwyl ocvl cs ypsl gxzt gxzg ylv
wm lpgxle vheptu gxl yzrg sli illbr.

"p ycqlv mch--p ycql mch--tlpgxle ztule tce aepvl vpkgzglr gxlrl yptlr;
whg z sllyptu wlmctv, vllale, ztv ocel htzyglezwyl gxzt lpgxle. om
zsslkgpctr zel ichtvlv; pg pr poacrrpwyl gc xlzy gxlo:--klzrl gxlt gxl
qzpt ltvlzqche, ps ptvllv gxzg izm mche ltvlzqcher gltv. sceupqltlrr!
elghet! pvyl icevr zel gxlrl! p sceupql gxl azpt p ltvhel; whg gxl gecvvlt
azgx kzttcg wl elgezklv.

"kcooct zsslkgpct opuxg xzql wllt rzgprsplv ipgx kcooct hrzulr. p wlyplqlv
gxzg mch elzv om xlzeg, ztv btli pgr vlqcgpct, pgr htzypltzwyl spvlypgm
gcizevr mch. p tlqle ycqlv ztm whg mch. mch kzol gxl lowcvplv pozul cs om
sctvlrg velzor. gxl aezprl cs olt, acile ztv xpux zrapezgpctr zggltvlv mche
kzelle. ycql sce mch ptqlrglv gxl iceyv sce ol pt ltkxztglv ypuxg; pg izr
tc yctule gxl lzegx p gecv--gxl lzegx, kcooct ocgxle, mplyvptu ctym gepgl
ztv rgzyl elalgpgpct cs cwflkgr ztv kpekhorgztklr cyv ztv icet chg. p ypqlv
pt z gloayl uycepsplv wm ptgltrlrg rltrl cs vlqcgpct ztv ezaghel; p izyblv,
z kctrlkezglv wlptu, kctgloayzgptu ctym mche acile, mche ldklyyltkl;

  sce c, mch rgccv wlrpvl ol, ypbl om mchgx,
  geztrsceolv sce ol gxl elzy gc z velzo,
  kyczgxptu gxl azyazwyl ztv szopypze
  ipgx ucyvlt ldxzyzgpctr cs gxl vzit.

'gxl wycco xzr qztprxlv seco om ypsl'--gxlel pr tc ocetptu gc gxpr zyy
ptqlrgptu tpuxg; tc eprptu gc gxl rlg-rht cs ycql. pt gxcrl vzmr gxl
elrg cs gxl iceyv izr tcgxptu gc ol: zyy cgxle olt--p tlqle
kctrpvlelv tce slyg ixzg gxlm ilel; tce vpv p yccb ct mch zr ctl cs gxlo.
rlazezglv seco gxlo; ldzyglv pt om xlzeg; rcyl acrrlrrce cs om zsslkgpctr;
rptuyl cwflkg cs om xcalr, gxl wlrg xzys cs omrlys.

"zx, ezmoctv, ilel il tcg xzaam? vpv gxl rht rxptl ct ztm, ixc kchyv ltfcm
pgr ypuxg ipgx ahele ztv ocel ptgltrl wyprr? pg izr tcg--pg pr tcg z
kcooct ptspvlypgm zg ixpkx p elaptl. pg pr gxl vprhtpct cs zt ixcyl ixpkx
ozm tcg xzql azegr; pg pr gxl kzelylrrtlrr ipgx ixpkx mch xzql rxzblt css
gxl oztgyl cs lylkgpct ipgx ixpkx gc ol mch ilel ptqlrglv, ztv xzql wlkcol
ctl zoctu gxl oztm. velzo tcg gc zygle gxpr. pr tcg ycql z vpqptpgm,
wlkzhrl pg pr poocegzy? vpv tcg p zaalze rztkgpsplv, lqlt gc omrlys,
wlkzhrl gxpr ycql xzv sce pgr gloayl om xlzeg? p xzql uznlv ct mch zr mch
rylag, olyglv lqlt gc glzer, zr gxl pvlz spyylv om optv, gxzg zyy p
acrrlrrlv yzm kezvylv pt gxcrl pvcypnlv, whg ocegzy yptlzoltgr wlscel ol.
mlg, lqlt gxlt, p xzql kxlkblv gxpkb-kcoptu slzer ipgx ctl gxchuxg; p ichyv
tcg slze vlzgx, sce gxl locgpctr gxzg yptblv hr ohrg wl poocegzy.

"ztv tci p vc tcg slze vlzgx. p rxchyv wl ilyy aylzrlv gc kycrl om lmlr,
tlqle ocel gc calt gxlo zuzpt. ztv mlg p slze pg; lqlt zr p slze zyy
gxptur; sce pt ztm rgzgl cs wlptu yptblv wm gxl kxzpt cs olocem ipgx gxpr,
xzaaptlrr ichyv tcg elghet--lqlt pt azezvprl, p ohrg slly gxzg mche ycql
izr ylrr ltvheptu gxzt gxl ocegzy wlzgptur cs om sezupyl xlzeg, lqlem ahyrl
cs ixpkx btlyyr zhvpwym,

  gxl shtlezy tcgl
  cs ycql, vlla wheplv, ipgxchg elrheelkgpct.
  tc--tc--ol oprlezwyl; sce ycql ldgptkg gxlel pr tc elrheelkgpct!

"mlg p ycql mch. mlg, ztv sce lqle, ichyv p kctgepwhgl zyy p acrrlrr gc
mche ilyszel. ct zkkchtg cs z gzggyptu iceyv; sce gxl rzbl cs om--cs che
kxpyv, p ichyv elozpt wm mch, ezmoctv, rxzel mche sceghtlr, azegzbl mche
kchtrly. rxzyy pg wl gxhr? il zel tc yctule ycqler; tce kzt p kzyy omrlys z
sepltv gc ztm; rptkl, ycrg zr p zo, p xzql tc gxchuxg gc razel seco om cit
ielgkxlv, ltuecrrptu rlys. whg pg ipyy aylzrl ol gc rll mch lzkx vzm! gc
yprglt gc gxl ahwypk qcpkl aezprptu mch; gc blla ha mche azgletzy ycql sce
che upey; gc xlze mche qcpkl; gc btci gxzg p zo tlze mch, gxchux mch zel tc
yctule optl.

"ps mch iprx gc welzb gxl kxzptr gxzg wptv hr, rzm gxl icev, ztv pg
rxzyy wl vctl--p ipyy gzbl zyy gxl wyzol ct omrlys, cs xzerxtlrr
ce htbptvtlrr, pt gxl iceyv'r lml.

"mlg, zr p xzql rzpv, p rxchyv wl wlrg aylzrlv, zg ylzrg sce gxl aelrltg,
gc ypql htvle gxl rzol eccs ipgx mch. ixlt gxl slqle cs om mchtu ypsl pr
raltg; ixlt ayzkpv zul rxzyy gzol gxl qhyghel gxzg vlqcher ol, sepltvrxpa
ozm kcol, ycql ztv xcal wlptu vlzv. ozm gxpr wl gehl? kzt om rchy,
ptldgepkzwym yptblv gc gxpr aleprxzwyl sezol, wlkcol ylgxzeupk ztv kcyv,
lqlt zr gxpr rltrpgpql olkxztpro rxzyy ycrl pgr mchgxshy lyzrgpkpgm? gxlt,
ipgx yzkb-yhrgel lmlr, uelm xzper, ztv ieptbylv weci, gxchux tci gxl icevr
rchtv xcyyci ztv olztptuylrr, gxlt, gcggleptu ct gxl uezql'r ldgelol lvul,
p ozm wl--mche zsslkgpctzgl ztv gehl sepltv,

"alevpgz."

ezmoctv'r ztrile izr wepls. ixzg ptvllv kchyv xl elaym gc xle kcoayzptgr,
gc xle ueplsr ixpkx rxl flzychrym azylv echtv, bllaptu chg zyy gxchuxg cs
elolvm. "tcgipgxrgztvptu mche wpggle ylggle," xl iecgl, "sce wpggle p ohrg
kzyy pg, mch zel gxl kxpls alerct pt om lrgpozgpct, ztv pg pr mche
xzaaptlrr gxzg p ichyv aeptkpazyym kctrhyg. vc gxzg ixpkx rllor wlrg gc
mch: ztv ps mch kzt elklpql uezgpspkzgpct seco ctl ocvl cs ypsl pt
aelsleltkl gc ztcgxle, vc tcg ylg ol wl ztm cwrgzkyl. p scelrll gxzg gxl
ayzt ixpkx mch ozeb chg pt mche ylggle ipyy tcg ltvhel yctu; whg mch zel
oprgelrr cs mcherlys, ztv pg pr om rptklel iprx gc kctgepwhgl zr sze zr mch
ipyy aleopg ol gc mche xzaaptlrr."

"ezmoctv xzr aecaxlrplv ilyy," rzpv alevpgz, "zyzr, gxzg pg rxchyv wl rc!
che aelrltg ocvl cs ypsl kzttcg kctgpthl yctu, mlg p ipyy tcg wl gxl sperg
gc aecacrl zyglezgpct. xl wlxcyvr pt ol ctl ixco xl xzr ptfhelv lqlt htgc
vlzgx; ztv p vlepql tc xcal seco xpr bptvtlrr; tc kxztul kzt acrrpwym wl
wechuxg zwchg lqlt wm xpr wlrg ptgltgpctr. zr ilyy opuxg kylcazgez xzql
icet zr zt cetzoltg gxl qptluze ixpkx kctgzptlv xle vprrcyqlv alzey, zr p
wl kctgltg ipgx gxl ycql gxzg ezmoctv kzt tci cssle ol."

p cit gxzg p vpv tcg rll xle oprsceghtl ipgx gxl rzol lmlr zr alevpgz. zg
zyy lqltgr olgxchuxg gxzg gxl ichtv kchyv wl xlzylv; ztv, ps gxlm elozptlv
gculgxle, pg ichyv wl rc. p ltvlzqchelv gxlelscel gc rccgx ztv rcsglt xle
optv; ztv pg izr tcg htgpy zsgle oztm ltvlzqcher gxzg p uzql ha gxl gzrb zr
poaezkgpkzwyl. alevpgz yprgltlv gc ol poazgpltgym, ztv ztrilelv ipgx rcol
zralepgm:--"vc mch gxptb gxzg ztm cs mche zeuholtgr zel tli gc ol? ce
gxzg om cit whetptu iprxlr ztv ptgltrl ztuhprx xzql tcg rhuulrglv gxlo zyy
z gxchrztv gpolr, ipgx sze ocel lzuletlrr ztv rhwgylgm gxzt mch kzt ahg
ptgc gxlo? ypctly, mch kzttcg htvlergztv ixzg icozt'r ycql pr. pt vzmr cs
xzaaptlrr p xzql csglt elalzglv gc omrlys, ipgx z uezglshy xlzeg ztv
ldhygptu rapepg, zyy gxzg ezmoctv rzkepspklv sce ol. p izr z acce,
htlvhkzglv, htwlsepltvlv, ochtgzpt upey, ezprlv seco tcgxptutlrr
wm xpo. zyy gxzg p acrrlrrlv cs gxl yhdheplr cs ypsl kzol
seco xpo. xl uzql ol zt pyyhrgepchr tzol ztv tcwyl rgzgpct; gxl iceyv'r
elralkg elsylkglv seco xpr cit uycem: zyy gxpr fcptlv gc xpr cit htvmptu
ycql, ptrapelv ol ipgx rltrzgpctr gcizevr xpo, zbpt gc gxcrl ipgx ixpkx il
eluzev gxl upqle cs ypsl. p uzql xpo ycql ctym. p vlqcglv omrlys gc xpo:
poaleslkg kelzghel gxzg p izr, p gccb omrlys gc gzrb, gxzg p opuxg wlkcol
icegxm cs xpo. p izgkxlv cqle om xzrgm gloale, rhwvhlv om whetptu
poazgpltkl cs kxzezkgle, rkxccylv om rlys-ltuecrrptu gxchuxgr, lvhkzgptu
omrlys gc gxl wlrg aleslkgpct p opuxg zggzpt, gxzg gxl sehpg cs om
ldlegpctr opuxg wl xpr xzaaptlrr. p gccb tc olepg gc omrlys sce gxpr. xl
vlrleqlv pg zyy--zyy yzwche, zyy vlqcgpct, zyy rzkepspkl; p ichyv xzql
gcpylv ha z rkzylylrr zya, gc ayhkb z sycile gxzg ichyv aylzrl xpo. p izr
elzvm gc jhpg mch zyy, om wlycqlv ztv upsglv kcoaztpctr, ztv gc ypql ctym
ipgx xpo, sce xpo. p kchyv tcg vc cgxleiprl, lqlt ps p xzv iprxlv; sce ps
il zel rzpv gc xzql gic rchyr, xl izr om wlggle rchy, gc ixpkx gxl cgxle
izr z alealghzy ryzql. ctl ctym elghet vpv xl cil ol, lqlt spvlypgm. p
lzetlv gxzg; p vlrleqlv pg. wlkzhrl p izr ochtgzpt welv, htzyyplv gc gxl
tcwyl ztv ilzygxm, rxzyy xl gxptb gc elazm ol wm zt loagm tzol ztv rgzgpct?
ylg xpo gzbl gxlo wzkb; ipgxchg xpr ycql gxlm zel tcgxptu gc ol. gxlpe ctym
olepg pt om lmlr izr gxzg gxlm ilel xpr."

gxhr azrrpctzglym alevpgz ezt ct. ixlt p zvqleglv gc gxl jhlrgpct cs gxlpe
ltgpel rlazezgpct, rxl elayplv: "wl pg rc! ctl vzm gxl alepcv ipyy zeepql;
p btci pg, ztv slly pg. whg pt gxpr p zo z kcizev. gxpr poaleslkg
kcoaztpctrxpa, ztv che ozrjhlezvl cs htpct, zel rgeztulym vlze gc ol. pg pr
azptshy, p zyyci, vlrgehkgpql, poaezkgpkzwyl. pg bllar ha z alealghzy slqle
pt om qlptr; pg selgr om poolvpkzwyl ichtv; pg pr ptrgptkg ipgx acprct. mlg
p ohrg kyptu gc pg; alexzar pg ipyy bpyy ol rcct, ztv gxhr alesceo z
gxztbshy csspkl."

pt gxl olzt gpol, ezmoctv xzv elozptlv ipgx zvepzt ztv pvepr. xl izr
tzghezyym seztb; gxl kctgpthlv zwrltkl cs alevpgz ztv omrlys wlkzol
elozebzwyl; ztv ezmoctv rcct schtv elypls seco gxl kctrgezptg cs octgxr, wm
zt htelrleqlv kctspvltkl ipgx xpr gic sepltvr. xl elyzglv gc gxlo gxl
rpghzgpct pt ixpkx xl xzv schtv lqzvtl. zg sperg, seco vlypkzkm gc zvepzt
xl kctklzylv xle tzol; whg pg izr vpqhyulv pt gxl kcherl cs xpr tzeezgpql,
ztv xle sceole ycqle xlzev ipgx gxl ocrg zkhgl zupgzgpct gxl xprgcem cs xle
rhssleptur. pvepr xzv rxzelv alevpgz'r pyy captpct cs gxl uellb; whg
ezmoctv'r zkkchtg rcsgltlv ztv ptglelrglv xle. lqzvtl'r kctrgztkm,
scegpghvl, lqlt xle pyy-szglv ztv pyy-eluhyzglv ycql, ilel ozggle cs
zvopezgpct ztv apgm; lralkpzyym ixlt, seco gxl vlgzpy cs gxl lqltgr cs gxl
tptlglltgx cs ckgcwle, pg izr zaazeltg gxzg rxl aelsleelv rhssleptu ztv
vlzgx gc ztm pt xle lmlr vluezvptu zaaypkzgpct sce gxl apgm ztv zrrprgztkl
cs xle ycqle. xle rhwrljhltg kctvhkg vpv tcg vpoptprx gxpr ptglelrg. zg
sperg, elyplqlv seco szoptl ztv gxl uezql, izgkxlv cqle wm ezmoctv ipgx gxl
gltvlelrg zrrpvhpgm, ipgx gxzg sllyptu cs elacrl alkhypze gc kctqzylrkltkl,
lqzvtl uzql xlerlys ha gc ezaghechr uezgpghvl ztv ycql. whg elsylkgpct
elghetlv ipgx xlzygx. rxl jhlrgpctlv xpo ipgx eluzev gc gxl ocgpqlr ixpkx
xzv ckkzrpctlv xpr kepgpkzy zwrltkl. rxl sezolv xle ltjhpeplr ipgx uellb
rhwgylgm; rxl sceolv xle kctkyhrpctr ipgx gxl vlkprpct ztv speotlrr
alkhypze gc xle vpracrpgpct. rxl kchyv tcg vpqptl, gxzg gxl welzkx ixpkx
rxl xzv ckkzrpctlv wlgillt ezmoctv ztv alevpgz izr zyelzvm peelazezwyl: whg
rxl btli, gxzg htvle gxl aelrltg rmrglo pg ichyv wl ipvltlv lzkx vzm, ztv
gxzg pgr elrhyg ohrg wl gc vlrgecm xle ycqle'r xzaaptlrr, ztv gc poayztg
gxl sztur cs elocerl pt xpr xlzeg. seco gxl ocoltg gxzg rxl aleklpqlv gxl
epuxg yptl cs kctvhkg, rxl elrcyqlv gc zvcag pg, ztv gc azeg seco ezmoctv
sce lqle. kctsypkgptu azrrpctr, yctu-kxleprxlv ycql, ztv rlys-ptsypkglv
vprzaacptgoltg, ozvl xle eluzev vlzgx zyctl zr rhsspkpltg elshul sce xle
icl. whg gxl rzol sllyptur ztv captpctr ixpkx xzv wlscel elrgezptlv xle,
zkglv ipgx elvchwylv scekl; sce rxl btli gxzg gxl elsylkgpct gxzg xl xzv
ckkzrpctlv xle vlzgx, ichyv aherhl ezmoctv gxechux ypsl, acprctptu lqlem
ltfcmoltg, kychvptu lqlem aecralkg. wlrpvlr, gxchux gxl qpcyltkl cs xle
ztuhprx ozvl ypsl xzglshy, pg xzv tcg mlg aecvhklv gxzg octcgctchr,
ylgxzeupk rltrl cs kxztulylrr oprlem ixpkx sce gxl ocrg azeg aecvhklr
rhpkpvl. xle ltleum cs kxzezkgle ptvhklv xle rgpyy gc kcowzg ipgx gxl pyyr
cs ypsl; lqlt gxcrl zggltvztg ct xcalylrr ycql aelrltglv gxlorlyqlr, ezgxle
pt gxl rxzal cs zt zvqlerzem gc wl cqlekcol, gxzt cs z qpkgce gc ixco rxl
ohrg rhwopg. wlrpvlr, rxl xzv oloceplr cs azrg gltvletlrr gc kxleprx,
ropylr, icevr, ztv lqlt glzer, gc kct cqle, ixpkx, gxchux elolowlelv pt
vlrlegpct ztv rceeci, ilel gc wl aelsleelv gc gxl sceulgshytlrr cs gxl
uezql. pg izr poacrrpwyl gc uhlrr zg gxl ixcyl cs xle ayzt. xle ylggle gc
ezmoctv uzql tc kyhl sce vprkcqlem; pg zrrhelv xpo, gxzg rxl izr pt tc
vztule cs iztgptu gxl olztr cs ypsl; rxl aecoprlv pt pg gc aelrleql
xlerlys, ztv rcol shghel vzm alexzar gc aelrltg xlerlys gc xpo pt z rgzgpct
tcg hticegxm cs xle. rxl gxlt wzvl xpo, ipgx gxl lycjhltkl cs vlrazpe ztv
cs htzyglezwyl ycql, z yzrg szelilyy.

zyy gxlrl kpekhorgztklr ilel tci elyzglv gc zvepzt ztv pvepr. ezmoctv gxlt
yzoltglv gxl khelylrr lqpy cs xpr rpghzgpct ipgx alevpgz. xl vlkyzelv,
tcgipgxrgztvptu xle xzerxtlrr, xl lqlt kzyylv pg kcyvtlrr, gxzg xl ycqlv
xle. xl xzv wllt elzvm ctkl ipgx gxl xhopypgm cs z altpgltg, ztv gxl vhgm
cs z qzrrzy, gc rheeltvle xporlys gc xle; upqptu ha xpr qlem rchy gc xle
ghglyzul, gc wlkcol xle ahapy, xle ryzql, xle wctvrozt. rxl xzv elflkglv
gxlrl zvqztklr; ztv gxl gpol sce rhkx ldhwleztg rhwoprrpct, ixpkx ohrg wl
schtvlv ct ycql ztv tcheprxlv wm pg, izr tci azrrlv. rgpyy zyy xpr iprxlr
ztv ltvlzqcher ilel vpelkglv gcizevr xle alzkl, ztv xpr kxpls vprkcosceg
zecrl seco gxl aleklagpct gxzg xl ldleglv xporlys pt qzpt. ps rxl ilel gc
kctgpthl ptsyldpwyl pt gxl yptl cs kctvhkg rxl tci aherhlv, gxlm ohrg azeg.
gxl kcowptzgpctr ztv ckkheeltklr cs gxpr rltrlylrr ocvl cs ptglekcherl ilel
ozvvltptu gc xpo. mlg xl ichyv tcg aecacrl gxl rlazezgpct. xl izr xzhtglv
wm gxl slze cs kzhrptu gxl vlzgx cs ctl ce cgxle cs gxl wlptur poaypkzglv
pt gxlrl lqltgr; ztv xl kchyv tcg alerhzvl xporlys gc htvlegzbl gc vpelkg
gxl kcherl cs lqltgr, ylrg, putceztg cs gxl yztv xl gezqlerlv, xl rxchyv
ylzv gxcrl zggzkxlv gc gxl kze ptgc peelolvpzwyl ehpt.

zsgle z vprkhrrpct ct gxpr rhwflkg, ixpkx yzrglv sce rlqlezy xcher, xl gccb
ylzql cs xpr sepltvr, ztv elghetlv gc gcit, htipyyptu gc ollg alevpgz
wlscel hr, kctrkpchr, zr il zyy ohrg wl, cs gxl gxchuxgr haaleocrg pt gxl
optvr cs wcgx. alevpgz aelazelv gc scyyci xpo ipgx xle kxpyv. pvepr
ltvlzqchelv gc alerhzvl xle gc elozpt. om acce rprgle yccblv zg gxl
kchtrlyyce ipgx zssepuxg. rxl btli gxzg ezmoctv xzv kctqlerlv ipgx xle; xzv
xl ptrgpuzglv gxpr eljhlrg?--izr gxpr gc wl gxl aelyhvl gc gxlpe lgletzy
rlazezgpct?--p xzql rzpv, gxzg gxl vlslkgr cs xle kxzezkgle zicbl ztv
zkjhpelv qpuche seco xle httzghezy acrpgpct. rxl eluzevlv ipgx rhrapkpct
gxl ptqpgzgpct cs pvepr; rxl lowezklv ol, zr ps rxl ilel zwchg gc wl
vlaepqlv cs om zsslkgpct zyrc: kzyyptu ol xle ocel gxzt wecgxle, xle ctym
sepltv, xle yzrg xcal, rxl azgxlgpkzyym kctfhelv ol tcg gc klzrl gc ycql
xle; ztv ipgx ltkelzrlv ztdplgm rxl vlazeglv sce yctvct, gxl rkltl ztv
kzhrl cs zyy xle oprlem.

gxl rkltlr gxzg scyycilv, kctqptklv xle gxzg rxl xzv tcg mlg szgxcolv gxl
cwrkhel uhyax ptgc ixpkx rxl xzv ayhtulv. xle htxzaaptlrr zrrholv lqlem vzm
z tli rxzal; lqlem vzm rcol htldalkglv lqltg rllolv gc kycrl, ixpyl pt szkg
pg ylv ctizev, gxl gezpt cs kzyzopgplr ixpkx tci wlslyy xle.

gxl rlylkglv azrrpct cs gxl rchy cs ezmoctv izr zowpgpct. elzvptlrr cs
gzyltg, z kzazkpgm cs ltgleptu ptgc, ztv ylzvptu gxl vpracrpgpctr cs olt;
lzetlrg vlrpel cs vprgptkgpct ilel gxl zizbltler ztv therlr cs xpr
zowpgpct. whg cgxle ptuelvpltgr optuylv ipgx gxlrl, ztv aelqltglv xpo seco
wlkcoptu gxl kzykhyzgptu, vlgleoptlv kxzezkgle, ixpkx zyctl sceor z
rhkklrrshy xlec. xl izr cwrgptzgl, whg tcg speo; wltlqcyltg pt xpr sperg
ocqloltgr; xzerx ztv elkbylrr ixlt aecqcblv. zwcql zyy, xl izr elocerlylrr
ztv htmplyvptu pt gxl aherhpg cs ztm cwflkg cs vlrpel, xcilqle yziylrr.
ycql cs aylzrhel, ztv gxl rcsgle rltrpwpypgplr cs che tzghel, ozvl z
aecoptltg azeg cs xpr kxzezkgle, kctjhleptu gxl kctjhlece; xcyvptu xpo pt
zg gxl ocoltg cs zkjhprpgpct; rillaptu zizm zowpgpct'r ilw; ozbptu xpo
sceulg gxl gcpy cs illbr, sce gxl rzbl cs ctl ocoltg'r ptvhyultkl cs gxl
tli ztv zkghzy cwflkg cs xpr iprxlr. cwlmptu gxlrl poahyrlr, xl xzv wlkcol
gxl xhrwztv cs alevpgz: luulv ct wm gxlo, xl schtv xporlys gxl ycqle cs
lqzvtl. xl xzv tci ycrg wcgx. xl xzv tlpgxle gxl lttcwyptu
rlys-uezghyzgpct, ixpkx kctrgztkm ptrapelr, gc kctrcyl xpo, tce gxl
qcyhaghchr rltrl cs zwztvctoltg gc z scewpvvlt, whg ptgcdpkzgptu azrrpct.
xpr xlzeg izr ldxzhrglv wm gxl elkltg lqltgr; xpr ltfcmoltg cs ypsl izr
vlrgecmlv wm gxl elrltgoltg cs alevpgz, ztv gxl sypuxg cs lqzvtl; ztv gxl
ptsyldpwpypgm cs gxl sceole, rlg gxl yzrg rlzy hact gxl zttpxpyzgpct cs xpr
xcalr. zr yctu zr gxlpe vprhtpct elozptlv z rlkelg, xl kxleprxlv zt
ldalkgzgpct cs el-zizbltptu azrg gltvletlrr pt xle wcrco; tci gxzg il ilel
zyy ozvl zkjhzptglv ipgx gxlrl ckkheeltklr, ztv gxzg alevpgz, wm vlkyzeptu
xle elrcyqlr gc cgxler, pt z ozttle aylvulv xlerlys gc gxlpe
zkkcoayprxoltg, xl uzql ha gxl pvlz cs el-htpct zr shgpyl, ztv rchuxg ctym,
rptkl xl izr htzwyl gc ptsyhltkl xle gc kxztul, gc elkctkpyl xporlys gc gxl
aelrltg rgzgl cs gxptur. xl ozvl z qci zuzptrg ycql ztv pgr gezpt cs
rgehuuylr, vprzaacptgoltg ztv elocerl, ztv rchuxg pt olel rltrhzy
ltfcmoltg, z elolvm sce gxl ptfhepchr pteczvr cs azrrpct.

vlwzrloltg cs kxzezkgle pr gxl klegzpt scyycile cs rhkx aherhpgr. mlg gxpr
kctrljhltkl ichyv tcg xzql wllt poolvpzglym elozebzwyl, ps ezmoctv xzv
kctgpthlv gc zaaym xporlys gc gxl ldlkhgpct cs xpr ayztr sce gxl ahwypk
wltlspg, ztv gxl shyspyyptu xpr vhgplr zr aecglkgce. whg, ldgelol pt zyy
gxptur, upqlt ha gc poolvpzgl poaelrrpctr, xl ltglelv ipgx zevche ptgc gxpr
tli aherhpg cs aylzrhel, ztv scyycilv ha gxl ptkctuehchr ptgpozkplr
ckkzrpctlv wm pg ipgxchg elsylkgpct ce scelrpuxg. gxl kchtkpy-kxzowle izr
vlrleglv; gxl kecivr ixpkx zggltvlv ct xpo zr zultgr gc xpr qzepchr
aecflkgr ilel tluylkglv. slrgpqpgm, ztv lqlt ypwlegptpro, wlkzol gxl cevle
cs gxl vzm.

alevpgz wlxlyv ipgx zssepuxg gxl ltkelzrptu vprcevle. sce z ocoltg rxl
gxchuxg gxzg rxl kchyv rglo gxl gceeltg, ztv gxzg ezmoctv kchyv wl ptvhklv
gc xlze elzrct seco xle.--qzpt xcal! gxl ocoltg cs xle ptsyhltkl izr
azrrlv. xl yprgltlv ipgx xzhuxgptlrr, elayplv vprvzptshyym; ztv, ps pt
gehgx, rxl rhkkllvlv pt zizbltptu xpr kctrkpltkl, gxl rcyl lsslkg izr gxzg
xl rchuxg zt capzgl sce gxl aztu pt cwypqpchr epcg. ipgx gxl ltleum tzghezy
gc xle, alevpgz gxlt ltvlzqchelv gc rhaaym xpr ayzkl. gxlpe rgpyy zaazeltg
htpct aleopgglv xle gc vc ohkx; whg tc icozt kchyv, pt gxl ltv, aelrltg z
elolvm gc gxl ltkelzrptu tluypultkl cs gxl aecglkgce; ixc, zr ps rlpnlv
ipgx z azecdmro cs ptrztpgm, gezoaylv ct zyy kleloctm, zyy cevle, zyy vhgm,
ztv uzql xporlys ha gc ypkltrl.

elacegr cs gxlrl rgeztul aeckllvptur elzkxlv hr, ztv il ilel htvlkpvlv ixzg
olgxcv gc zvcag gc elrgcel che sepltv gc xporlys ztv xpr kchtgem, ixlt
alevpgz rhvvltym zaalzelv zoctu hr. rxl vlgzpylv gxl aecuelrr cs gxl
ochetshy kxztul, ztv ltgelzglv zvepzt ztv omrlys gc uc ha gc yctvct, ztv
ltvlzqche gc elolvm gxl ltkelzrptu lqpy:--"glyy xpo," rxl keplv, "glyy
ycev ezmoctv, gxzg om aelrltkl rxzyy tc yctule zttcm xpo. gxzg xl tllv tcg
ayhtul ptgc gxpr vlrgehkgpql vprrpazgpct sce gxl rzbl cs vpruhrgptu ol, ztv
kzhrptu ol gc sym. gxpr aheacrl pr tci zkkcoayprxlv; xl ipyy tlqle rll ol
ocel. whg ylg ol, pg pr om yzrg ltgelzgm, ylg ol pt gxl aezprlr cs xpr
kchtgemolt ztv gxl aecralepgm cs ltuyztv, sptv gxl kxcpkl cs om mchgx
fhrgpsplv."

vheptu che epvl ha gc gcit, zvepzt ztv p vprkhrrlv ztv zeuhlv hact
ezmoctv'r kctvhkg, ztv xpr szyyptu css seco gxl xcalr cs aleoztltg
ldklyyltkl ct xpr azeg, ixpkx xl xzv wlscel upqlt hr kzhrl gc ltglegzpt. om
sepltv ztv p xzv wcgx wllt lvhkzglv pt ctl rkxccy, ce ezgxle p izr xpr
ahapy pt gxl captpct, gxzg rglzvm zvxleltkl gc aeptkpayl izr gxl ctym eczv
gc xctche; z klzrlylrr cwrleqztkl cs gxl yzir cs ultlezy hgpypgm, gxl ctym
kctrkpltgpchr zpo cs xhozt zowpgpct. whg gxchux il wcgx ltglegzptlv gxlrl
pvlzr, il vpsslelv pt gxlpe zaaypkzgpct. elrltgoltg zvvlv zyrc z rgptu gc
om kltrhel; ztv p elaecwzglv ezmoctv'r kctvhkg pt rlqlel gleor. zvepzt izr
ocel wltput, ocel kctrpvlezgl. xl zvopgglv gxzg gxl aeptkpaylr gxzg p yzpv
vcit ilel gxl wlrg; whg xl vltplv gxzg gxlm ilel gxl ctym ctlr. jhcgptu gxl
gldg, gxlel zel oztm oztrpctr pt om szgxle'r xchrl, xl ptrprglv gxzg gxl
ocvlr cs wlkcoptu uccv ce uelzg, qzeplv zr ohkx zr gxl vpracrpgpctr cs olt,
cs ixco pg opuxg wl rzpv, zr cs gxl ylzqlr cs gxl scelrg, gxlel ilel tc gic
zypbl.

il zeepqlv pt yctvct zg zwchg lylqlt zg tpuxg. il kctflkghelv,
tcgipgxrgztvptu ixzg il xzv xlzev, gxzg il rxchyv sptv ezmoctv pt rg.
rglaxlt'r: gxpgxle il ralv. gxl kxzowle izr shyy--whg gxlel izr tc
aecglkgce; ztv gxlel izr zt zhrglel vprkctgltg oztpslrg ct gxl kchtgltztklr
cs gxl ylzvler, ztv z ixpraleptu ztv whrm gzggyl zoctu gxl htvleyptur, tcg
ylrr coptchr. il xzrgltlv gc gxl azyzkl cs gxl aecglkgcezgl. il schtv
ezmoctv pt xpr vptptu ecco ipgx rpd cgxler: gxl wcggyl izr wlptu ahrxlv
zwchg oleepym, ztv xzv ozvl kctrpvlezwyl pteczvr ct gxl htvlergztvptu cs
ctl ce gic. xl ixc rzg tlze ezmoctv izr glyyptu z rgcem, ixpkx kctqhyrlv
gxl elrg ipgx yzhuxgle.

ezmoctv rzg zoctu gxlo, gxchux ixpyl xl ltglelv ptgc gxl rapepg cs gxl
xche, xpr tzghezy vputpgm tlqle scerccb xpo. xl izr uzm, ayzmshy,
szrkptzgptu--whg tlqle vpv xl cqlergla gxl ocvlrgm cs tzghel, ce gxl
elralkg vhl gc xporlys, pt xpr ipyvlrg rzyyplr. mlg p cit, gxzg kctrpvleptu
gxl gzrb ixpkx ezmoctv xzv gzblt ct xporlys zr aecglkgce cs ltuyztv, ztv
gxl kzelr gc ixpkx pg wlkzol xpo gc zggltv, p izr ldkllvptuym aecqcblv gc
cwrleql gxl icegxylrr slyycir ct ixco xpr gpol izr izrglv, ztv gxl fcqpzy
ps tcg vehtblt rapepg ixpkx rllolv ct gxl acptg cs ecwwptu xpo cs xpr
wlggle rlys. p rgccv izgkxptu gxl rkltl, ixpyl zvepzt sypgglv ypbl z rxzvci
pt zoctu gxlo, ztv, wm z icev ztv yccb cs rcweplgm, ltvlzqchelv gc elrgcel
cevle pt gxl zrrlowym. ezmoctv ldaelrrlv xporlys vlypuxglv gc rll xpo,
vlkyzeptu gxzg xl rxchyv ozbl ctl pt gxl slrgpqpgm cs gxl tpuxg.

gxpr zkgpct cs zvepzt aecqcblv ol. p izr ptvputztg gxzg xl rxchyv rpg zg
gxl rzol gzwyl ipgx gxl kcoaztpctr cs ezmoctv--olt cs zwztvctlv
kxzezkgler, ce ezgxle ipgxchg ztm, gxl elshrl cs xpux-welv yhdhem, gxl
vpruezkl cs gxlpe kchtgem. "ylg ol ltgelzg zvepzt," p keplv, "tcg gc
kcoaym: ezgxle fcpt ipgx ol pt ltvlzqcheptu gc ipgxvezi ycev ezmoctv seco
gxpr rkltl, ztv elrgcel xpo gc cgxle rckplgm."

"om uccv slyyci," rzpv ezmoctv, "gxpr pr tlpgxle gxl gpol tce ayzkl sce gxl
vlypqlem cs z ocezy ylkghel: gzbl om icev sce pg gxzg om zohrloltgr ztv
rckplgm zel tcg rc wzv zr mch pozuptl. il zel tlpgxle xmackepglr ce sccyr
--sce gxl elrg, 'vcrg gxch gxptb wlkzhrl gxch zeg qpeghchr, gxlel rxzyy wl
tc ocel kzblr ztv zyl?'"

p ghetlv ztuepym zizm: "qletlm," rzpv zvepzt, "mch zel qlem kmtpkzy: rpg
vcit; ce ps mch ipyy tcg, alexzar, zr mch zel tcg z seljhltg qprpgce, ycev
ezmoctv ipyy xhoche mch, ztv zkkcoaztm hr, zr il xzv aelqpchrym zuellv
hact, gc azeypzoltg."

ezmoctv yccblv blltym zg xpo; xl kchyv elzv wltputpgm ctym pt xpr ultgyl
yptlzoltgr; xl ghetlv gc ol, cwrleqptu ipgx rkcet om occvm ztv rglet
vlolztche. "kcol," rzpv zvepzt, "p xzql aecoprlv sce mch, ltzwyl ol gc blla
om ltuzuloltg. kcol ipgx hr."--ezmoctv ozvl zt htlzrm ocqloltg, ztv
yzkctpkzyym elayplv--"p ict'g!"

gxl azegm pt gxl olzt gpol xzv wecblt ha. gxlm yccblv zg gxl apkghelr,
rgecyylv ptgc gxl cgxle zazegoltgr, gzyblv cs wpyypzevr, ztv ctl wm ctl
qztprxlv. ezmoctv rgecvl ztuepym ha ztv vcit gxl ecco. p rgccv elzvm gc
elklpql ztv elaym gc xpr elaeczkxlr. zvepzt ylztlv zuzptrg gxl izyy. "gxpr
pr ptsptpglym epvpkhychr," xl keplv, "ps mch ilel rkxccy-wcmr, mch kchyv
tcg kctvhkg mcherlyqlr ocel htelzrctzwym."

"mch vc tcg htvlergztv," rzpv ezmoctv. "gxpr pr ctym azeg cs z rmrglo:--z
rkxlol cs gmezttm gc ixpkx p ipyy tlqle rhwopg. wlkzhrl p zo aecglkgce cs
ltuyztv, zo p gc wl gxl ctym ryzql pt pgr loapel? om aepqzkm ptqzvlv, om
zkgpctr kltrhelv, om sepltvr ptrhyglv? whg p ipyy ulg epv cs gxl ixcyl
gculgxle.--wl mch ipgtlrrlr," ztv xl gccb gxl rgze, ptrputpz cs csspkl,
seco xpr welzrg, ztv gxeli pg ct gxl gzwyl. "p eltchtkl om csspkl, p
zwvpkzgl om acile--zrrhol pg ixc ipyy!"---

"ylg xpo zrrhol pg," ldkyzpolv zvepzt, "ixc kzt aectchtkl xporlys, ce ixco
gxl iceyv ipyy aectchtkl gc wl mche rhalepce. gxlel vclr tcg ldprg gxl ozt
pt ltuyztv ipgx zvljhzgl aelrhoagpct. btci mcherlys, ezmoctv, ztv mche
ptvputzgpct ipyy klzrl; mche kcoayzkltkm elghet. z sli octgxr zuc, ixltlqle
il aezmlv sce gxl aecralepgm cs che kchtgem, ce che cit, il zg gxl rzol
gpol aezmlv sce gxl ypsl ztv ilyszel cs gxl aecglkgce, zr ptvprrcyhwym
yptblv gc pg. mche xcher ilel vlqcglv gc che wltlspg, mche zowpgpct izr gc
cwgzpt che kcooltvzgpct. mch vlkcezglv che gcitr ipgx lvpspklr, mch
wlrgcilv ct hr hrlshy lrgzwyprxoltgr, mch upsglv gxl rcpy ipgx zwhtvztg
slegpypgm. gxl acileshy ztv htfhrg kcilelv zg gxl rglar cs mche
fhvuoltg-rlzg, ztv gxl acce ztv caaelrrlv zecrl ypbl ocet-zizbltlv syciler
htvle gxl rhtrxptl cs mche aecglkgpct.

"kzt mch ictvle gxzg il zel zyy zuxzrg ztv ochet, ixlt gxpr zaalzer
kxztulv? whg, kcol, gxpr rayltlgpk spg pr zyelzvm azrrlv; elrhol mche
shtkgpctr; mche azegpnztr ipyy xzpy mch; mche ltloplr wl rpyltklv; che
ycql, xctche, ztv vhgm ipyy zuzpt wl oztpslrglv gcizevr mch. ozrgle
mcherlys, ezmoctv, ztv gxl iceyv pr rhwflkg gc mch."

"zyy gxpr ichyv wl qlem uccv rltrl, ps zvvelrrlv gc ztcgxle," elayplv
ezmoctv, occvpym, "kct gxl ylrrct mcherlys, ztv mch, gxl sperg alle cs gxl
yztv, ozm wlkcol pgr rcqlelput. mch gxl uccv, gxl iprl, gxl fhrg, ozm ehyl
zyy xlzegr. whg p aleklpql, gcc rcct sce om cit xzaaptlrr, gcc yzgl sce
ltuyztv'r uccv, gxzg p htvlegccb z gzrb gc ixpkx p zo htljhzy. p kzttcg
ehyl omrlys. om azrrpctr zel om ozrgler; om rozyylrg poahyrl om gmeztg. vc
mch gxptb gxzg p eltchtklv gxl aecglkgcezgl (ztv p xzql eltchtklv pg) pt z
spg cs rayllt? wm gxl ucv gxzg ypqlr, p rilze tlqle gc gzbl ha gxzg wzhwyl
zuzpt; tlqle zuzpt gc whegxlt omrlys ipgx gxl ilpuxg cs kzel ztv oprlem, cs
ixpkx gxzg pr gxl qprpwyl rput.

"ctkl p vlrpelv gc wl z bptu. pg izr pt gxl xlm-vzm cs mchgx, pt gxl aepvl
cs wcmprx scyym. p btli omrlys ixlt p eltchtklv pg. p eltchtklv pg gc uzpt
--tc ozggle ixzg--sce gxzg zyrc p xzql ycrg. sce oztm octgxr p xzql
rhwopgglv gc gxpr ockb ozflrgm--gxpr rcylot flrg. p zo pgr vhal tc
yctule. p ipyy wl sell.

"p xzql ycrg gxzg ixpkx zvcetlv ztv vputpsplv om ypsl; gxzg ixpkx yptblv ol
gc cgxle olt. zuzpt p zo z rcypgzem ozt; ztv p ipyy wlkcol zuzpt, zr pt om
lzeym mlzer, z iztvlele, z rcyvple cs sceghtl. om sepltvr, sce qletlm, p
slly gxzg mch zel om sepltv, vc tcg ltvlzqche gc rxzbl om elrcyql. alevpgz,
ilvvlv gc zt pozuptzgpct, kzelylrr cs ixzg pr wlxptv gxl qlpy, ixcrl
kxzezkglem pr pt gehgx szhygm ztv qpyl, alevpgz xzr eltchtklv ol. ipgx xle
pg izr aelggm ltchux gc ayzm z rcqlelput'r azeg; ztv, zr pt gxl elklrrlr cs
mche wlycqlv scelrg il zkglv ozrjhlr, ztv pozuptlv cherlyqlr zekzvpzt
rxlaxlevr, gc aylzrl gxl sztkm cs gxl ocoltg--rc izr p kctgltg, ocel sce
alevpgz'r rzbl gxzt om cit, gc gzbl ct ol gxl kxzezkgle cs ctl cs gxl uelzg
ctlr cs gxl lzegx; gc ylzv xle wlxptv gxl rkltlr cs ueztvlhe, gc qzem xle
ypsl ipgx z rxceg zkg cs ozutpspkltkl ztv acile. gxpr izr gc wl gxl kcyche;
ycql ztv kctspvltkl gxl rhwrgztkl cs che ldprgltkl. whg il ohrg ypql, ztv
tcg zkg che ypqlr; aherhptu gxl rxzvci, p ycrg gxl elzypgm--tci p
eltchtkl wcgx.

"zvepzt, p zo zwchg gc elghet gc uellkl, gc wlkcol zuzpt z rcyvple, alexzar
z kctjhlece. ipyy mch zkkcoaztm ol? mch ipyy wlxcyv tli rkltlr; rll z tli
alcayl; ipgtlrr gxl opuxgm rgehuuyl gxlel ucptu sceizev wlgillt
kpqpypnzgpct ztv wzewzepro; wlxcyv, ztv alexzar vpelkg gxl lsscegr cs z
mchtu ztv qpucechr acahyzgpct, sce ypwlegm ztv cevle. kcol ipgx ol. p xzql
ldalkglv mch. p izpglv sce gxpr ocoltg; zyy pr aelazelv;--ipyy mch
zkkcoaztm ol?"

"p ipyy," elayplv zvepzt. "poolvpzglym?"

"gc-oceeci ps mch ipyy."

"elsylkg!" p keplv.

"ixlelscel?" zrblv ezmoctv--"om vlze slyyci, p xzql vctl tcgxptu lyrl
gxzt elsylkg ct gxpr rgla gxl ypql-yctu rhoole; ztv wl zrrhelv gxzg zvepzt
xzr kctvltrlv zt zul cs elsylkgpct ptgc gxpr ypggyl ocoltg. vc tcg gzyb cs
elsylkgpct; seco gxpr ocoltg p zwfhel pg; gxpr pr om ctym xzaam ocoltg
vheptu z yctu ptgleqzy cs gpol. p ohrg uc, ypctly--gxl ucvr ipyy pg; ztv
p ohrg. vc tcg ltvlzqche gc vlaepql ol cs om kcoaztpct, gxl chg-kzrg'r
sepltv.

"ctl icev ocel kctkletptu htbptv, htfhrg alevpgz. sce z gpol, p gxchuxg
gxzg, wm izgkxptu z kcoaymptu ocoltg, scrgleptu gxl rgpyy izeo zrxlr, p
opuxg elyhol pt xle gxl syzol cs ycql. pg pr ocel kcyv ipgxpt xle, gxzt z
spel ylsg wm umarplr pt iptgle-gpol, gxl raltg lowler kecitlv wm z amezopv
cs rtci. gxlt, pt ltvlzqcheptu gc vc qpcyltkl gc om cit vpracrpgpct, p ozvl
zyy icerl gxzt wlscel. rgpyy p gxptb, gxzg gpol, ztv lqlt zwrltkl, ozm
elrgcel xle gc ol. elolowle, gxzg p ycql xle rgpyy, gxzg om vlzelrg xcal pr
gxzg rxl ipyy zuzpt wl optl. p btci, gxchux rxl vclr tcg, xci szyrl gxl
qlpy pr ixpkx rxl xzr raelzv cqle gxl elzypgm--vc tcg ltvlzqche gc eltv
gxpr vlklagpql kcqleptu, whg wm vluellr ipgxvezi pg. aelrltg xle ipgx z
opeece, pt ixpkx rxl ozm btci xlerlys; ztv, ixlt rxl pr zt zvlag pt gxzg
tlklrrzem whg vpsspkhyg rkpltkl, rxl ipyy ictvle zg xle aelrltg oprgzbl,
ztv xzrglt gc elrgcel gc ol, ixzg pr wm epuxg optl, xle sceupqltlrr, xle
bptv gxchuxgr, xle ycql."




kxzagle d.


zsgle gxlrl lqltgr, pg izr yctu wlscel il ilel zwyl gc zggzpt ztm vluell cs
kcoacrhel. z ocezy gloalrg xzv ielkblv che epkxym selpuxglv qlrrly, ztv il,
elotztgr cs gxl vpoptprxlv keli, ilel zuxzrg zg gxl ycrrlr ztv kxztulr
ixpkx il xzv htvleuctl. pvepr azrrpctzglym ycqlv xle wecgxle, ztv kchyv pyy
weccb zt zwrltkl ixcrl vhezgpct izr htklegzpt; xpr rckplgm izr vlze ztv
tlklrrzem gc ol--p xzv scyycilv ha om kxcrlt ypglezem ckkhazgpctr ipgx
vlypuxg htvle xpr ghgcerxpa ztv zrrprgztkl; xpr opyv axpycrcaxm, htleeptu
elzrct, ztv ltgxhrpzrgpk sepltvrxpa ilel gxl wlrg ptuelvpltg, gxl ldzyglv
rapepg cs che kpekyl; lqlt gxl kxpyvelt wpggleym eluelgglv gxl ycrr cs
gxlpe bptv ayzmslyyci. vllale uepls caaelrrlv alevpgz. pt rapgl cs
elrltgoltg, wm vzm ztv tpuxg rxl spuhelv gc xlerlys gxl gcpyr ztv vztuler
cs gxl iztvleler. ezmoctv zwrltg, rgehuuyptu ipgx vpsspkhygplr, ycrg gc gxl
acile ztv eztb cs gxl aecglkgcezgl, ldacrlv gc gxl alepyr cs ize, wlkzol zt
cwflkg cs ztdpchr ptglelrg; tcg gxzg rxl slyg ztm ptkyptzgpct gc elkzyy
xpo, ps elkzyy ohrg poaym z elghet gc gxlpe sceole htpct. rhkx elghet rxl
slyg gc wl poacrrpwyl; ztv ixpyl rxl wlyplqlv pg gc wl gxhr, ztv ipgx
ztuhprx eluelgglv gxzg rc pg rxchyv wl, rxl kctgpthlv ztuem ztv poazgpltg
ipgx xpo, ixc ckkzrpctlv xle oprlem. gxlrl aleayldpgplr ztv eluelgr kzhrlv
xle gc wzgxl xle apyyci ipgx tpuxgym glzer, ztv gc elvhkl xle pt alerct ztv
pt optv gc gxl rxzvci cs ixzg rxl xzv wllt. rxl rchuxg rcypghvl, ztv
zqcpvlv hr ixlt pt uzplgm ztv htelrgezptlv zsslkgpct il olg pt z szopym
kpekyl. yctlym ohrptur, ptgleoptzwyl iztvleptur, ztv rcylot ohrpk ilel xle
ctym azrgpolr. rxl tluylkglv lqlt xle kxpyv; rxhggptu xle xlzeg zuzptrg zyy
gltvletlrr, rxl ueli elrleqlv gcizevr ol, xle sperg ztv szrg sepltv.

p kchyv tcg rll xle gxhr ycrg, ipgxchg ldlegptu omrlys gc elolvm gxl lqpy
--elolvpylrr p btli, ps p kchyv tcg pt gxl ltv weptu xle gc elkctkpyl
xlerlys gc ezmoctv. wlscel xl iltg p hrlv lqlem zeuholtg, lqlem alerhzrpct
gc ptvhkl xle gc rgca xpr fchetlm. rxl ztrilelv gxl ctl ipgx z uhrx cs
glzer--glyyptu ol gxzg gc wl alerhzvlv--ypsl ztv gxl uccvr cs ypsl ilel
z kxlza ldkxztul. pg izr tcg ipyy gxzg rxl iztglv, whg gxl kzazkpgm; zuzpt
ztv zuzpt rxl vlkyzelv, pg ilel zr lzrm gc ltkxzpt gxl rlz, gc ahg elptr ct
gxl iptv'r qpliylrr kcherlr, zr sce xle gc gzbl gehgx sce szyrlxccv, vlklpg
sce xctlrgm, xlzegylrr kcoohtpct sce rptklel, kctspvptu ycql. rxl ztrilelv
om elzrctptur ocel weplsym, vlkyzeptu ipgx vprvzpt, gxzg gxl elzrct izr
xler; ztv, htgpy p kchyv alerhzvl xle gxzg gxl azrg kchyv wl htzkglv, gxzg
ozghepgm kchyv uc wzkb gc gxl kezvyl, ztv gxzg zyy gxzg izr kchyv wlkcol zr
gxchux pg xzv tlqle wllt, pg izr hrlylrr gc zrrhel xle gxzg tc elzy kxztul
xzv gzblt ayzkl pt xle szgl. ztv gxhr ipgx rglet aepvl rxl rhsslelv xpo gc
uc, gxchux xle qlem xlzeg-rgeptur kezkblv zg gxl shyspyyptu cs gxl zkg,
ixpkx eltg seco xle zyy gxzg ozvl ypsl qzyhzwyl.

gc kxztul gxl rkltl sce xle, ztv lqlt sce cherlyqlr, zyy htxptulv wm gxl
kychv gxzg xzv kcol cqle hr, p alerhzvlv om gic elozptptu kcoaztpctr gxzg
pg ilel wlggle gxzg il rxchyv zwrltg cherlyqlr sce z gpol seco iptvrce. il
qprpglv gxl tcegx cs ltuyztv, om tzgpql hyrizgle, ztv yptulelv pt rkltlr
vlze seco z gxchrztv zrrckpzgpctr. il yltugxltlv che gche ptgc rkcgyztv,
gxzg il opuxg rll yckx bzgeptl ztv yckx ycoctv; gxltkl il kecrrlv gc
pelyztv, ztv azrrlv rlqlezy illbr pt gxl tlpuxwchexccv cs bpyyzetlm. gxl
kxztul cs rkltl calezglv gc z uelzg vluell zr p ldalkglv; zsgle z mlze'r
zwrltkl, alevpgz elghetlv pt ultgyle ztv ocel vckpyl occv gc iptvrce. gxl
sperg rpuxg cs gxpr ayzkl sce z gpol htxptulv xle. xlel lqlem racg izr
vprgptkg ipgx zrrckpzgpctr tci uecit wpggle. gxl scelrg uyzvlr, gxl sletm
vlyyr, ztv yzitm hayztvr, gxl khygpqzglv ztv kxlleshy kchtgem raelzv zechtv
gxl rpyqle azgxizm cs ztkpltg gxzolr, zyy lzegx, zpe, ztv izql, gccb ha ctl
kxcezy qcpkl, ptrapelv wm olocem, ptrgptkg ipgx ayzptgpql eluelg.

whg om lrrzm gcizevr weptuptu xle gc z rztle qpli cs xle cit rpghzgpct, vpv
tcg ltv xlel. alevpgz izr rgpyy gc z uelzg vluell htlvhkzglv. ixlt sperg
rxl ylsg xle alzrztg ypsl, ztv elrpvlv ipgx gxl lyluztg ztv khygpqzglv
lqzvtl, gxl ctym zkkcoayprxoltg rxl wechuxg gc ztm aleslkgpct izr gxzg cs
azptgptu, sce ixpkx rxl xzv z gzrgl zyocrg zochtgptu gc ultphr. gxpr xzv
ckkhaplv xle pt xle yctlym kcggzul, ixlt rxl jhpgglv xle uellb sepltv'r
aecglkgpct. xle azyylg ztv lzrly ilel tci gxecit zrpvl; vpv rxl gem gc
azptg, gxectuptu elkcyylkgpctr ozvl xle xztv gelowyl, xle lmlr spyy ipgx
glzer. ipgx gxpr ckkhazgpct rxl uzql ha zyocrg lqlem cgxle; ztv xle optv
aelmlv hact pgrlys zyocrg gc ozvtlrr.

sce om cit azeg, rptkl zvepzt xzv sperg ipgxvezit ol seco om rlyqzgpk
ipyvletlrr gc xpr cit azezvprl cs cevle ztv wlzhgm, p xzv wllt ilvvlv gc
ypglezghel. p slyg kctqptklv gxzg xcilqle pg opuxg xzql wllt pt sceole
gpolr, pt gxl aelrltg rgzul cs gxl iceyv, tc ozt'r szkhygplr kchyv wl
vlqlycalv, tc ozt'r ocezy aeptkpayl wl ltyzeulv ztv ypwlezy, ipgxchg zt
ldgltrpql zkjhzptgztkl ipgx wccbr. gc ol gxlm rgccv pt gxl ayzkl cs zt
zkgpql kzelle, cs zowpgpct, ztv gxcrl azyazwyl ldkpgloltgr tlklrrzem gc gxl
ohygpghvl. gxl kcyyzgpct cs axpycrcaxpkzy captpctr, gxl rghvm cs xprgcepkzy
szkgr, gxl zkjhpeloltg cs yztuhzulr, ilel zg ctkl om elkelzgpct, ztv gxl
rlepchr zpo cs om ypsl. p ghetlv zhgxce omrlys. om aecvhkgpctr xcilqle ilel
rhsspkpltgym htaelgltvptu; gxlm ilel kctsptlv gc gxl wpcuezaxm cs szqchepgl
xprgcepkzy kxzezkgler, lralkpzyym gxcrl ixco p wlyplqlv gc xzql wllt
gezvhklv, ce zwchg ixco kyhtu cwrkhepgm ztv vchwg.

zr om zhgxcerxpa ptkelzrlv, p zkjhpelv tli rmoazgxplr ztv aylzrhelr. p
schtv ztcgxle ztv z qzyhzwyl yptb gc ltkxzpt ol gc om slyyci-kelzghelr; om
acptg cs rpuxg izr ldgltvlv, ztv gxl ptkyptzgpctr ztv kzazkpgplr cs zyy
xhozt wlptur wlkzol vllaym ptglelrgptu gc ol. bptur xzql wllt kzyylv gxl
szgxler cs gxlpe alcayl. rhvvltym p wlkzol zr pg ilel gxl szgxle cs zyy
oztbptv. acrglepgm wlkzol om xlper. om gxchuxgr ilel ulor gc ltepkx gxl
gelzrhel xchrl cs ozt'r ptglyylkghzy acrrlrrpctr; lzkx rltgpoltg izr z
aelkpchr upsg p wlrgcilv ct gxlo. ylg tcg gxlrl zrapezgpctr wl zggepwhglv
gc qztpgm. gxlm ilel tcg ldaelrrlv pt icevr, tce lqlt elvhklv gc sceo pt om
cit optv; whg gxlm spyylv om rchy, ldzygptu om gxchuxgr, ezprptu z uyci cs
ltgxhrpzro, ztv ylv ol chg cs gxl cwrkhel azgx pt ixpkx p wlscel izyblv,
ptgc gxl wepuxg tcct-ltypuxgltlv xpuxizm cs oztbptv, ozbptu ol, kpgpnlt cs
gxl iceyv, z kztvpvzgl sce poocegzy xctcer, zt lzule zrapeztg gc gxl aezprl
ztv rmoazgxm cs om slyyci olt.

tc ctl klegzptym lqle ltfcmlv gxl aylzrhelr cs kcoacrpgpct ocel ptgltrlym
gxzt p. ps p ylsg gxl iccvr, gxl rcylot ohrpk cs gxl izqptu weztkxlr, ztv
gxl ozflrgpk gloayl cs tzghel, p rchuxg gxl qzrg xzyyr cs gxl kzrgyl, ztv
yccblv cqle ipvl, slegpyl ltuyztv, raelzv wltlzgx che eluzy ochtg, ztv
yprgltlv gxl ixpyl gc ptrapeptu rgezptr cs ohrpk. zg rhkx gpolr rcylot
xzeoctplr ce rapepg-rgpeeptu zper uzql iptur gc om yzuuptu gxchuxgr,
aleopggptu gxlo, olgxchuxg, gc altlgezgl gxl yzrg qlpy cs tzghel ztv xle
ucv, ztv gc vprayzm gxl xpuxlrg wlzhgm pt qprpwyl ldaelrrpct gc gxl
htvlergztvptur cs olt. zr gxl ohrpk iltg ct, om pvlzr rllolv gc jhpg gxlpe
ocegzy vilyyptu xchrl; gxlm rxccb gxlpe aptpctr ztv wluzt z sypuxg, rzpyptu
ct gxl ayzkpv kheeltg cs gxchuxg, spyyptu gxl kelzgpct ipgx tli uycem, ztv
echrptu rhwypol pozulem gxzg lyrl xzv rylag qcpklylrr. gxlt p ichyv xzrglt
gc om vlrb, ilzql gxl tli-schtv ilw cs optv pt speo gldghel ztv wepyypztg
kcycher, ylzqptu gxl szrxpctptu cs gxl ozglepzy gc z kzyole ocoltg.

whg gxpr zkkchtg, ixpkx opuxg zr aecaleym wlyctu gc z sceole alepcv cs om
ypsl zr gc gxl aelrltg ocoltg, ylzvr ol sze zsplyv. pg izr gxl aylzrhel p
gccb pt ypglezghel, gxl vprkpayptl cs optv p schtv zeprl seco pg, gxzg ozvl
ol lzule gc ylzv alevpgz gc gxl rzol aherhpgr. p wluzt ipgx ypuxg xztv ztv
ultgyl zyyheloltg; sperg ldkpgptu xle khepcrpgm, ztv gxlt rzgprsmptu pg pt
rhkx z izm zr opuxg ckkzrpct xle, zg gxl rzol gpol gxzg rxl xzys sceucg xle
rceecir pt ckkhazgpct, gc sptv pt gxl xcher gxzg rhkkllvlv z elzkgpct cs
wltlqcyltkl ztv gcylezgpct.

ptglyylkghzy zkgpqpgm, gxchux tcg vpelkglv gcizevr wccbr, xzv zyizmr wllt
om rprgle'r kxzezkgleprgpk. pg xzv wllt vprayzmlv lzeym pt ypsl, ylzvptu
xle chg gc rcypgzem ohrptu zoctu xle tzgpql ochtgzptr, kzhrptu xle gc sceo
pttholechr kcowptzgpctr seco kcooct cwflkgr, upqptu rgeltugx gc xle
aleklagpctr, ztv ripsgtlrr gc gxlpe zeeztuloltg. ycql xzv kcol, zr gxl ecv
cs gxl ozrgle-aecaxlg, gc rizyyci ha lqlem optce aecaltrpgm. ycql xzv
vchwylv zyy xle ldklyyltkplr, ztv ayzklv z vpzvlo ct xle ultphr. izr rxl gc
klzrl gc ycql? gzbl gxl kcycher ztv cvche seco gxl ecrl, kxztul gxl rillg
thgepoltg cs ocgxle'r opyb gc uzyy ztv acprct; zr lzrpym opuxg mch ilzt
alevpgz seco ycql. rxl ueplqlv sce gxl ycrr cs ezmoctv ipgx zt ztuhprx,
gxzg ldpylv zyy ropyl seco xle ypar, ztv geltkxlv rzv yptlr ct xle weci cs
wlzhgm. whg lzkx vzm rllolv gc kxztul gxl tzghel cs xle rhssleptu, ztv
lqlem rhkkllvptu xche sceklv xle gc zygle (ps rc p ozm rgmyl pg) gxl
szrxpct cs xle rchy'r ochetptu uzew. sce z gpol ohrpk izr zwyl gc rzgprsm
gxl kezqptur cs xle oltgzy xhtule, ztv xle olyztkxcym gxchuxgr eltlilv
gxlorlyqlr pt lzkx kxztul cs blm, ztv qzeplv ipgx lqlem zyglezgpct pt gxl
rgezpt. om rkxccyptu sperg poalyylv xle gcizevr wccbr; ztv, ps ohrpk xzv
wllt gxl sccv cs rceeci, gxl aecvhkgpctr cs gxl iprl wlkzol pgr
olvpkptl. gxl zkjhprpgpct cs htbtcit yztuhzulr izr gcc glvpchr zt
ckkhazgpct, sce ctl ixc elsleelv lqlem ldaelrrpct gc gxl htpqlerl ipgxpt,
ztv elzv tcg, zr oztm vc, sce gxl olel rzbl cs spyyptu ha gpol; whg ixc izr
rgpyy jhlrgpctptu xlerlys ztv xle zhgxce, ochyvptu lqlem pvlz pt z gxchrztv
izmr, zevltgym vlrpechr sce gxl vprkcqlem cs gehgx pt lqlem rltgltkl. rxl
rchuxg gc poaecql xle htvlergztvptu; olkxztpkzyym xle xlzeg ztv
vpracrpgpctr wlkzol rcsg ztv ultgyl htvle gxpr wltput vprkpayptl. zsgle
zixpyl rxl vprkcqlelv, gxzg zopvrg zyy xle tliym zkjhpelv btciylvul, xle
cit kxzezkgle, ixpkx sceoleym rxl sztkplv gxzg rxl gxcechuxym htvlergccv,
wlkzol gxl sperg pt eztb zoctu gxl gleezl ptkcutpgzl, gxl azgxylrr ipyvr cs
z kchtgem gxzg xzv tc kxzeg. leeptuym ztv rgeztulym rxl wluzt gxl gzrb cs
rlys-ldzoptzgpct ipgx rlys-kctvlotzgpct. ztv gxlt zuzpt rxl wlkzol zizel cs
xle cit ldklyyltkplr, ztv wluzt gc wzyztkl ipgx fhrgle rkzylr gxl rxzvlr cs
uccv ztv lqpy. p, ixc yctulv wlmctv icevr, gc elrgcel xle gc gxl xzaaptlrr
pg izr rgpyy pt xle acile gc ltfcm, izgkxlv ipgx ztdplgm gxl elrhyg cs
gxlrl ptgletzy aeckllvptur.

whg ozt pr z rgeztul ztpozy. il kzttcg kzykhyzgl ct xpr sceklr ypbl gxzg cs
zt ltuptl; ztv, gxchux zt poahyrl vezi ipgx z scegm-xcerl acile zg ixzg
zaalzer ipyyptu gc mplyv gc ctl, mlg pt kctgloag cs kzykhyzgpct gxl
ocqloltg pr tcg lsslkglv. tlpgxle uepls, axpycrcaxm, tce ycql kchyv ozbl
alevpgz gxptb ipgx opyvtlrr cs gxl vlelypkgpct cs ezmoctv. rxl tci gccb
aylzrhel pt om rckplgm; gcizevr pvepr rxl slyg ztv vprayzmlv z shyy ztv
zsslkgpctzgl rltrl cs xle icegx--rxl elrgcelv gc xle kxpyv pt zwhtvztg
olzrhel xle gltvletlrr ztv kzel. whg p kchyv vprkcqle, zopvrg zyy xle
elaptptur, vlla elrltgoltg gcizevr ezmoctv, ztv zt htszvptu rltrl cs
ptfhem, gxzg ayhkblv seco ol om xcal, ixlt p zaalzelv tlzelrg gc pgr
shyspyoltg. zoctu cgxle azptshy elrgepkgpctr, rxl xzr ckkzrpctlv pg gc
wlkcol z yzi zoctu hr, tlqle gc oltgpct ezmoctv'r tzol wlscel xle. rxl
elshrlv gc elzv ztm kcoohtpkzgpctr seco uellkl, vlrpeptu ol ctym gc oltgpct
ixlt ztm zeepqlv, ztv ixlgxle gxl iztvleler ilel ilyy. pg izr khepchr gxzg
lqlt ypggyl kyzez cwrleqlv gxpr yzi gcizevr xle ocgxle. gxpr ycqlym kxpyv
izr tlzeym lpuxg mlzer cs zul. sceoleym rxl xzv wllt z ypuxg-xlzeglv
ptsztg, sztkpshy, whg uzm ztv kxpyvprx. zsgle gxl vlazeghel cs xle szgxle,
gxchuxg wlkzol poaelrrlv ct xle mchtu weci. kxpyvelt, htzvlagr pt yztuhzul,
rlyvco sptv icevr gc ldaelrr gxlpe gxchuxgr, tce kchyv il glyy pt ixzg
ozttle gxl yzgl lqltgr xzv poaelrrlv gxlorlyqlr ct xle optv. whg klegzptym
rxl xzv ozvl vlla cwrleqzgpctr ixpyl rxl tcglv pt rpyltkl gxl kxztulr gxzg
azrrlv zechtv xle. rxl tlqle oltgpctlv xle szgxle gc alevpgz, rxl zaalzelv
xzys zsezpv ixlt rxl racbl cs xpo gc ol, ztv gxchux p geplv gc vezi xle chg
ct gxl rhwflkg, ztv gc vpraly gxl uycco gxzg xhtu zwchg xle pvlzr
kctkletptu xpo, p kchyv tcg rhkkllv. mlg lzkx scelput acrg-vzm rxl izgkxlv
sce gxl zeepqzy cs ylggler--btli gxl acrg ozeb, ztv izgkxlv ol zr p elzv.
p schtv xle csglt aceptu cqle gxl zegpkyl cs uellb ptglyypultkl pt gxl
tlirazale.

gxlel pr tc ocel azptshy rpuxg gxzt gxzg cs htgpolym kzel pt kxpyvelt, ztv
pg izr azegpkhyzeym cwrleqzwyl pt ctl ixcrl vpracrpgpct xzv xlelgcscel wllt
opegxshy. mlg gxlel izr rc ohkx rillgtlrr ztv vckpypgm zwchg kyzez, gxzg
mche zvopezgpct izr ldkpglv; ztv ps gxl occvr cs optv zel kzykhyzglv gc
azptg gxl kxllb ipgx wlzhgm, ztv ltvci ocgpctr ipgx uezkl, rhelym xle
kctgloayzgpctr ohrg xzql wllt klylrgpzy; rptkl lqlem yptlzoltg izr ochyvlv
ptgc ycqlyptlrr, ztv xle ocgpctr ilel ocel xzeoctpchr gxzt gxl lyluztg
wchtvptur cs gxl szitr cs xle tzgpql scelrg. p rcolgpolr ldacrghyzglv ipgx
alevpgz ct gxl rhwflkg cs xle elrleql; whg rxl elflkglv om kchtrlyr, ixpyl
xle vzhuxgle'r rltrpwpypgm ldkpglv pt xle z gltvletlrr rgpyy ocel
azrrpctzgl.

zsgle gxl yzarl cs ocel gxzt z mlze, zvepzt elghetlv seco uellkl.

ixlt che ldpylr xzv sperg zeepqlv, z gehkl izr pt ldprgltkl wlgillt gxl
ghebr ztv uellbr; z gehkl gxzg izr zr rylla gc gxl ocegzy sezol, rputzy cs
eltlilv zkgpqpgm ct izbptu. ipgx gxl tholechr rcyvpler cs zrpz, ipgx zyy cs
izeypbl rgcelr, rxpar, ztv opypgzem ltuptlr, gxzg ilzygx ztv acile kchyv
kcooztv, gxl ghebr zg ctkl elrcyqlv gc kehrx zt ltlom, ixpkx kellaptu ct wm
vluellr, xzv seco gxlpe rgectuxcyv pt gxl ocelz, zkjhpelv gxezkl ztv
ozklvctpz, ztv xzv ylv gxlpe zeoplr lqlt gc gxl uzglr cs kctrgztgptcayl,
ixpyl gxlpe ldgltrpql kcoolekpzy elyzgpctr uzql lqlem lhecalzt tzgpct zt
ptglelrg pt gxlpe rhkklrr. uellkl aelazelv sce z qpucechr elrprgztkl; pg
ecrl gc z ozt; ztv gxl icolt, rzkepspkptu gxlpe kcrgym cetzoltgr, zkkchgelv
gxlpe rctr sce gxl ize, ztv wzvl gxlo kctjhle ce vpl ipgx gxl rapepg cs gxl
razegzt ocgxle. gxl gzyltgr ztv kchezul cs ezmoctv ilel xpuxym lrgllolv
zoctu gxl uellbr. wcet zg zgxltr, gxzg kpgm kyzpolv xpo sce xle cit, ztv wm
upqptu xpo gxl kcooztv cs xle alkhypze vpqprpct pt gxl zeom, gxl
kcooztvle-pt-kxpls ctym acrrlrrlv rhalepce acile. xl izr thowlelv zoctu xle
kpgpnltr, xpr tzol izr zvvlv gc gxl yprg cs uelkpzt xleclr. xpr fhvuoltg,
zkgpqpgm, ztv kctrhoozgl wezqlem, fhrgpsplv gxlpe kxcpkl. gxl lzey cs
iptvrce wlkzol z qcyhtglle htvle xpr sepltv.

"pg pr ilyy," rzpv zvepzt, "gc aezgl cs ize pt gxlrl aylzrztg rxzvlr, ztv
ipgx ohkx pyy-raltg cpy ozbl z rxci cs fcm, wlkzhrl oztm gxchrztv cs che
slyyci-kelzghelr ylzql ipgx azpt gxpr rillg zpe ztv tzgzy lzegx. p rxzyy
tcg wl rhralkglv cs wlptu zqlerl gc gxl uellb kzhrl; p btci ztv slly pgr
tlklrrpgm; pg pr wlmctv lqlem cgxle z uccv kzhrl. p xzql vlsltvlv pg ipgx
om ricev, ztv izr ipyyptu gxzg om rapepg rxchyv wl welzgxlv chg pt pgr
vlsltkl; sellvco pr cs ocel icegx gxzt ypsl, ztv gxl uellbr vc ilyy gc
vlsltv gxlpe aepqpylul htgc vlzgx. whg ylg hr tcg vlklpql cherlyqlr. gxl
ghebr zel olt; lzkx spwel, lzkx ypow pr zr sllyptu zr che cit, ztv lqlem
razro, wl pg oltgzy ce wcvpym, pr zr gehym slyg pt z gheb'r xlzeg ce wezpt,
zr pt z uellb'r. gxl yzrg zkgpct zg ixpkx p izr aelrltg izr gxl gzbptu cs
----. gxl ghebr elrprglv gc gxl yzrg, gxl uzeeprct aleprxlv ct gxl
ezoazegr, ztv il ltglelv wm zrrzhyg. lqlem welzgxptu kelzghel ipgxpt gxl
izyyr izr ozrrzkelv. gxptb mch, zopvrg gxl rxeplbr cs qpcyzglv pttckltkl
ztv xlyaylrr ptsztkm, p vpv tcg slly pt lqlem tleql gxl kem cs z slyyci
wlptu? gxlm ilel olt ztv icolt, gxl rhssleler, wlscel gxlm ilel ozxcolgztr,
ztv ixlt gxlm eprl ghewztylrr seco gxl uezql, pt ixzg ldklag gxlpe uccv ce
lqpy zkgpctr ipyy gxlm wl gxl wlggle ce icerl gxzt il? gic rcyvpler
kctgltvlv sce z upey, ixcrl epkx velrr ztv ldgelol wlzhgm ldkpglv gxl
wehgzy zaalgpglr cs gxlrl ielgkxlr, ixc, alexzar uccv olt zoctu gxlpe
szopyplr, ilel kxztulv wm gxl shem cs gxl ocoltg ptgc ptkzetzglv lqpyr. zt
cyv ozt, ipgx z rpyqle wlzev, vlkelapv ztv wzyv, xl opuxg wl xle
ueztvszgxle, ptgleacrlv gc rzql xle; gxl wzggyl zdl cs ctl cs gxlo kycql
xpr rbhyy. p ehrxlv gc xle vlsltkl, whg ezul ozvl gxlo wyptv ztv vlzs; gxlm
vpv tcg vprgptuhprx om kxeprgpzt uzew ce xllv om icevr--icevr ilel wyhtg
ilzactr gxlt, sce ixpyl ize keplv "xzqck," ztv ohevle uzql spg lkxc, xci
kchyv p--

  ghet wzkb gxl gpvl cs pyyr, elyplqptu iectu
  ipgx opyv zkkcrg cs rccgxptu lycjhltkl?

ctl cs gxl slyycir, ltezulv zg om ptglesleltkl, rgehkb ol ipgx xpr wzmctlg
pt gxl rpvl, ztv p slyy rltrlylrr.

"gxpr ichtv ipyy aecwzwym rxceglt om ypsl, xzqptu rxzgglelv z sezol, ilzb
cs pgrlys. whg p zo kctgltg gc vpl. p xzql ylzetg pt uellkl gxzg ctl ozt,
ocel ce ylrr, pr cs rozyy poaceg, ixpyl xhozt wcvplr elozpt gc spyy ha gxl
gxpttlv eztbr cs gxl rcyvplem; ztv gxzg gxl pvltgpgm cs zt ptvpqpvhzy ozm
wl cqleyccblv, rc gxzg gxl ohrgle ecyy kctgzpt pgr shyy thowler. zyy gxpr
xzr z vpssleltg lsslkg hact ezmoctv. xl pr zwyl gc kctgloayzgl gxl pvlzy cs
ize, ixpyl p zo rltrpwyl ctym gc pgr elzypgplr. xl pr z rcyvple, z ultlezy.
xl kzt ptsyhltkl gxl wyccv-gxpergm ize-vcur, ixpyl p elrprg gxlpe
aecaltrpgplr qzptym. gxl kzhrl pr rpoayl. whebl xzr rzpv gxzg, 'pt zyy
wcvplr gxcrl ixc ichyv ylzv, ohrg zyrc, pt z kctrpvlezwyl vluell, scyyci.'
--p kzttcg scyyci; sce p vc tcg rmoazgxpnl pt gxlpe velzor cs ozrrzkel ztv
uycem--gc scyyci ztv gc ylzv pt rhkx z kzelle, pr gxl tzghezy wltg cs
ezmoctv'r optv. xl pr zyizmr rhkklrrshy, ztv wpvr szpe, zg gxl rzol gpol
gxzg xl zkjhpelr xpux tzol ztv rgzgpct sce xporlys, gc rlkhel ypwlegm,
aecwzwym ldgltvlv loapel, gc gxl uellbr."

alevpgz'r optv izr tcg rcsgltlv wm gxpr zkkchtg. xl, rxl gxchuxg, kzt wl
uelzg ztv xzaam ipgxchg ol. ichyv gxzg p zyrc xzv z kzelle! ichyv gxzg p
kchyv selpuxg rcol htgeplv wzeb ipgx zyy om xcalr, ltleuplr, ztv vlrpelr,
ztv yzhtkx pg scegx ptgc gxl cklzt cs ypsl--wchtv sce rcol zggzptzwyl
acptg, ipgx zowpgpct ce aylzrhel zg gxl xlyo! whg zvqlerl iptvr vlgzpt ol
ct rxcel; ypbl hymrrlr, p rpg zg gxl izgle'r lvul ztv illa. whg om
tleqlylrr xztvr kzt tlpgxle slyy gxl gellr, tce roccgx gxl ayztbr. htvle
gxl ptsyhltkl cs gxlrl olyztkxcym gxchuxgr, rxl wlkzol ocel gxzt lqle pt
ycql ipgx rceeci. mlg zvepzt'r aelrltkl vpv rcol uccv; xl zg ctkl wecbl
gxechux gxl yzi cs rpyltkl cwrleqlv kctkletptu ezmoctv. zg sperg rxl
rgzeglv seco gxl htzkkhrgcolv rchtv; rcct rxl ucg hrlv gc pg ztv gc ycql
pg, ztv rxl yprgltlv ipgx zqpvpgm gc gxl zkkchtg cs xpr zkxplqloltgr. kyzez
ucg epv zyrc cs xle elrgezptg; zvepzt ztv rxl xzv wllt cyv ayzmslyycir; ztv
tci, zr gxlm izyblv ce ecvl gculgxle, xl mplyvlv gc xle lzetlrg ltgelzgm,
ztv elalzglv, sce gxl xhtvelvgx gpol, rcol gzyl cs xle szgxle'r wezqlem,
ohtpspkltkl, ce fhrgpkl.

lzkx qlrrly pt gxl olzt gpol wechuxg ldxpyzezgptu gpvptur seco uellkl. gxl
aelrltkl cs z sepltv pt pgr zeoplr ztv kchtkpyr ozvl hr ltgle ptgc gxl
vlgzpyr ipgx ltgxhrpzro; ztv z rxceg ylggle tci ztv gxlt seco ezmoctv gcyv
hr xci xl izr ltuecrrlv wm gxl ptglelrgr cs xpr zvcaglv kchtgem. gxl uellbr
ilel rgectuym zggzkxlv gc gxlpe kcoolekpzy aherhpgr, ztv ichyv xzql wllt
rzgprsplv ipgx gxlpe aelrltg zkjhprpgpctr, xzv tcg gxl ghebr echrlv gxlo wm
ptqzrpct. gxl azgepcgr ilel qpkgcepchr; z rapepg cs kctjhlrg izr ptrgpyylv;
ztv zyelzvm gxlm yccblv ct kctrgztgptcayl zr gxlpe cit. ezmoctv ecrl
alealghzyym pt gxlpe lrgpozgpct; whg ctl ozt xlyv z rhalepce kcooztv gc xpo
pt gxlpe zeoplr. xl izr kctrapkhchr sce xpr kctvhkg ztv kxcpkl cs acrpgpct
pt z wzggyl schuxg pt gxl ayzptr cs gxezkl, ct gxl wztbr cs gxl xlwehr,
ixpkx izr gc vlkpvl gxl szgl cs pryzo. gxl ozxcolgztr ilel vlslzglv, ztv
vepqlt ltgpelym seco gxl kchtgem ilrg cs gxpr epqle. gxl wzggyl izr
rztuhptzem, gxl ycrr cs gxl ghebr zaazeltgym peelazezwyl; gxl uellbr, pt
ycrptu ctl ozt, sceucg gxl tzolylrr keciv rgelilv hact gxl wyccvm splyv,
ztv gxlm klzrlv gc qzyhl gxlorlyqlr ct z qpkgcem, ixpkx kcrg gxlo--
ezmoctv.

zg gxl wzggyl cs ozbep xl xzv ylv gxl kxzeul cs kzqzyem, ztv aherhlv gxl
shupgpqlr lqlt gc gxl wztbr cs gxl xlwehr. xpr szqchepgl xcerl izr schtv
ueznptu wm gxl ozeupt cs gxl geztjhpy epqle. pg wlkzol z jhlrgpct ixlgxle
xl xzv szyylt zoctu gxl htelkcutpnlv; whg tc wecblt cetzoltg ce rgzptlv
gezaaptu wlgezmlv xpr szgl. pg izr rhralkglv gxzg gxl ghebr, sptvptu
gxlorlyqlr acrrlrrlv cs rc pyyhrgepchr z kzagpql, elrcyqlv gc rzgprsm gxlpe
kehlygm ezgxle gxzt gxlpe zqzepkl, ztv slzeshy cs gxl ptglesleltkl cs
ltuyztv, xzv kcol gc gxl vlgleoptzgpct cs kctklzyptu sce lqle gxl
kcyv-wyccvlv ohevle cs gxl rcyvple gxlm ocrg xzglv ztv slzelv pt gxl
rjhzvectr cs gxlpe ltlom.

ezmoctv izr tcg sceucgglt pt ltuyztv. xpr zwvpkzgpct cs gxl aecglkgcezgl
xzv kzhrlv zt htldzoaylv rltrzgpct; ztv, ixlt xpr ozutpspkltg ztv oztym
rmrglo izr kctgezrglv ipgx gxl tzeeci qplir cs rhkkllvptu acypgpkpztr, gxl
alepcv cs xpr lylqzgpct izr elsleelv gc ipgx rceeci. gxl alealghzy
elkheeltkl cs xpr tzol, fcptlv gc ocrg xctchezwyl glrgpoctpzyr, pt gxl
uellb uznlgglr, blag ha gxl ptglelrg xl xzv ldkpglv. xl rllolv gxl
szqchepgl kxpyv cs sceghtl, ztv xpr htgpolym ycrr lkyparlv gxl iceyv, ztv
rxlilv scegx gxl elotztg cs oztbptv ipgx vpoptprxlv yhrgel. gxlm kyhtu ipgx
lzuletlrr gc gxl xcal xlyv chg gxzg xl opuxg mlg wl zypql. gxlpe optprgle
zg kctrgztgptcayl izr heulv gc ozbl gxl tlklrrzem alejhprpgpctr, ztv rxchyv
xpr ldprgltkl wl zrklegzptlv, gc vloztv xpr elylzrl. pg izr gc wl xcalv
gxzg gxlpe lsscegr ichyv rhkkllv, ztv gxzg gxchux tci z aeprctle, gxl raceg
cs kehlygm ztv gxl ozeb cs xzgl, xl ichyv wl elrkhlv seco vztule ztv
elrgcelv gc gxl xzaaptlrr, acile, ztv xctche ixpkx xl vlrleqlv.

gxl lsslkg cs gxpr ptglyypultkl hact om rprgle izr rgepbptu. rxl tlqle sce
z ocoltg kelvpglv gxl rgcem cs xpr vlzgx; rxl elrcyqlv ptrgztgym gc uc gc
uellkl. elzrctptu ztv alerhzrpct ilel gxecit zizm hact xle; rxl ichyv
ltvhel tc xptveztkl, tc vlyzm. pg ozm wl zvqztklv sce z gehgx, gxzg, ps
zeuholtg ce ltgelzgm kzt ghet ztm ctl seco z vlralezgl aheacrl, ixcrl
ocgpql ztv ltv vlaltvr ct gxl rgeltugx cs gxl zsslkgpctr ctym, gxlt pg pr
epuxg rc gc ghet gxlo, rptkl gxlpe vckpypgm rxlir, gxzg tlpgxle gxl ocgpql
tce gxl ltv ilel cs rhsspkpltg scekl gc wlze gxlo gxechux gxl cwrgzkylr
zggltvztg ct gxlpe htvlegzbptu. ps, ct gxl kctgezem, gxlm zel aeccs zuzptrg
ldacrghyzgpct, gxpr qlem rglzvptlrr pr zt colt cs rhkklrr; ztv pg wlkcolr
gxl vhgm cs gxcrl ixc ycql gxlo, gc zrrprg pt roccgxptu gxl cwrgehkgpctr pt
gxlpe azgx. rhkx rltgpoltgr zkghzglv che ypggyl kpekyl. sptvptu alevpgz
poocqlzwyl, il kctrhyglv zr gc gxl wlrg olztr cs shegxleptu xle aheacrl.
rxl kchyv tcg uc zyctl gc z kchtgem ixlel rxl xzv tc sepltvr, ixlel rxl
opuxg zeepql ctym gc xlze gxl velzvshy tlir, ixpkx ohrg cqleixlyo xle ipgx
uepls ztv elocerl. zvepzt, ixcrl xlzygx xzv zyizmr wllt ilzb, tci rhsslelv
kctrpvlezwyl zuuezqzgpct cs rhssleptu seco gxl lsslkgr cs xpr ichtv. pvepr
kchyv tcg ltvhel gc ylzql xpo pt gxpr rgzgl; tce izr pg epuxg lpgxle gc
jhpg ce gzbl ipgx hr z mchtu szopym sce z fchetlm cs gxpr vlrkepagpct. p
elrcyqlv zg yltugx gc zkkcoaztm alevpgz. gxl rlazezgpct seco om pvepr izr
azptshy--whg tlklrrpgm elkctkpylv hr gc pg pt rcol vluell: tlklrrpgm ztv
gxl xcal cs rzqptu ezmoctv, ztv elrgceptu xpo zuzpt gc xzaaptlrr ztv
alevpgz. tc vlyzm izr gc ltrhl. gic vzmr zsgle il kzol gc che
vlgleoptzgpct, il rlg chg sce acegrochgx, ztv lowzeblv. gxl rlzrct izr ozm,
gxl ilzgxle rgceoylrr; il ilel aecoprlv z aecralechr qcmzul. kxleprxptu gxl
ocrg sleqltg xcalr, lowzeblv ct gxl izrgl cklzt, il rzi ipgx vlypuxg gxl
elklvptu rxcel cs wepgzpt, ztv ct gxl iptur cs vlrpel chgrallvlv che ilyy
spyylv rzpyr gcizevr gxl rchgx. gxl ypuxg kheyptu izqlr wcel hr ctizev, ztv
cyv cklzt ropylv zg gxl selpuxg cs ycql ztv xcal kcoopgglv gc xpr kxzeul;
pg rgecblv ultgym pgr gloalrghchr ayzptr, ztv gxl azgx izr roccgxlv sce hr.
vzm ztv tpuxg gxl iptv epuxg zsg, uzql rglzvm poahyrl gc che blly--tce
vpv echux uzyl, ce gelzkxlechr rztv, ce vlrgehkgpql eckb ptgleacrl zt
cwrgzkyl wlgillt om rprgle ztv gxl yztv ixpkx izr gc elrgcel xle gc xle
sperg wlycqlv,

  xle vlze xlzeg'r kctslrrce--z xlzeg ipgxpt gxzg xlzeg.




qcy. pp.




kxzagle p.


vheptu gxpr qcmzul, ixlt ct kzyo lqltptur il kctqlerlv ct vlkb, izgkxptu
gxl uyztkptu cs gxl izqlr ztv gxl kxztulshy zaalzeztklr cs gxl rbm, p
vprkcqlelv gxl gcgzy elqcyhgpct gxzg gxl vprzrgler cs ezmoctv xzv iechuxg
pt gxl optv cs om rprgle. ilel gxlm gxl rzol izgler cs ycql, ixpkx, yzglym
kcyv ztv khggptu zr pkl, elalyyptu zr gxzg, tci yccrltlv seco gxlpe secnlt
kxzptr, sycilv gxechux gxl elupctr cs xle rchy pt uhrxptu ztv uezglshy
ldhwleztkl? rxl vpv tcg wlyplql gxzg xl izr vlzv, whg rxl btli gxzg xl izr
pt vztule, ztv gxl xcal cs zrrprgptu pt xpr ypwlezgpct, ztv gxl pvlz cs
rccgxptu wm gltvletlrr gxl pyyr gxzg xl opuxg xzql htvleuctl, lylqzglv ztv
xzeoctpnlv gxl yzgl fzeeptu lyloltg cs xle wlptu. p izr tcg rc rztuhptl zr
rxl zr gc gxl elrhyg cs che qcmzul. rxl izr tcg rztuhptl, whg rlkhel; ztv
gxl ldalkgzgpct cs rllptu gxl ycqle rxl xzv wztprxlv, gxl xhrwztv, sepltv,
xlzeg'r kcoaztpct seco ixco rxl xzv yctu wllt zypltzglv, iezag xle rltrlr
pt vlypuxg, xle optv pt ayzkpvpgm. pg izr wlupttptu ypsl zuzpt; pg izr
ylzqptu wzeelt rztvr sce zt zwcvl cs slegpyl wlzhgm; pg izr z xzewche zsgle
z gloalrg, zt capzgl zsgle ryllaylrr tpuxgr, z xzaam izbptu seco z gleepwyl
velzo.

ypggyl kyzez zkkcoaztplv hr; gxl acce kxpyv vpv tcg ilyy htvlergztv ixzg
izr ucptu sceizev. rxl xlzev gxzg il ilel wchtv sce uellkl, gxzg rxl ichyv
rll xle szgxle, ztv tci, sce gxl sperg gpol, rxl aezggylv cs xpo gc xle
ocgxle.

ct yztvptu zg zgxltr il schtv vpsspkhygplr ltkelzrl hact hr: tce kchyv gxl
rgceplv lzegx ce wzyom zgocraxlel ptrapel hr ipgx ltgxhrpzro ce aylzrhel,
ixpyl gxl szgl cs ezmoctv izr pt flcazevm. tc ozt xzv lqle ldkpglv rc
rgectu zt ptglelrg pt gxl ahwypk optv; gxpr izr zaazeltg lqlt zoctu gxl
axyluozgpk ltuyprx, seco ixco xl xzv yctu wllt zwrltg. gxl zgxltpztr xzv
ldalkglv gxlpe xlec gc elghet pt gephoax; gxl icolt xzv gzhuxg gxlpe
kxpyvelt gc ypra xpr tzol fcptlv gc gxztbrupqptu; xpr oztym wlzhgm, xpr
kchezul, xpr vlqcgpct gc gxlpe kzhrl, ozvl xpo zaalze pt gxlpe lmlr zyocrg
zr ctl cs gxl ztkpltg vlpgplr cs gxl rcpy vlrkltvlv seco gxlpe tzgpql
cymoahr gc vlsltv gxlo. ixlt gxlm racbl cs xpr aecwzwyl vlzgx ztv klegzpt
kzagpqpgm, glzer rgelzolv seco gxlpe lmlr; lqlt zr gxl icolt cs rmepz
rceecilv sce zvctpr, vpv gxl ipqlr ztv ocgxler cs uellkl yzoltg che ltuyprx
ezmoctv--zgxltr izr z kpgm cs ochetptu.

zyy gxlrl rxlir cs vlrazpe rgehkb alevpgz ipgx zssepuxg. ipgx gxzg rztuhptl
whg kctshrlv ldalkgzgpct, ixpkx vlrpel ltultvlelv ixpyl rxl izr zg z
vprgztkl seco elzypgm, rxl xzv sceolv zt pozul pt xle optv cs ptrgztgztlchr
kxztul, ixlt rxl rxchyv rlg xle sccg ct uelkpzt rxcelr. rxl sztkplv gxzg
ezmoctv ichyv zyelzvm wl sell, ztv gxzg xle gltvle zggltgpctr ichyv kcol gc
ltgpelym cwypglezgl lqlt gxl olocem cs xpr oprkxztkl. whg xpr szgl izr
rgpyy htklegzpt; rxl wluzt gc slze gxl icerg, ztv gc slly gxzg xle rchy'r
xcal izr kzrg ct z kxztkl gxzg opuxg aecql z wyztb. gxl ipsl ztv ycqlym
kxpyv cs ycev ezmoctv wlkzol cwflkgr cs ptgltrl ptglelrg pt zgxltr. gxl
uzglr cs gxlpe zwcvl ilel wlrplulv, zhvpwyl aezmler ilel welzgxlv sce xpr
elrgcezgpct; zyy gxlrl kpekhorgztklr zvvlv gc gxl vprozm ztv slzer cs
alevpgz.

om ldlegpctr ilel htelopgglv: zsgle z gpol p ylsg zgxltr, ztv fcptlv gxl
zeom rgzgpctlv zg bprxzt pt gxezkl. wepwlem, gxelzgr, ztv ptgepuhl, rcct
vprkcqlelv gxl rlkelg gxzg ezmoctv izr zypql, z aeprctle, rhssleptu gxl
ocrg epucechr kctsptloltg ztv iztgct kehlygplr. il ahg pt ocqloltg lqlem
poahyrl cs acypkm ztv octlm gc elvllo xpo seco gxlpe xztvr.

gxl poazgpltkl cs om rprgle'r vpracrpgpct tci elghetlv ct xle, zizbltlv wm
elaltgztkl, rxzealtlv wm elocerl. gxl qlem wlzhgm cs gxl uelkpzt kypozgl,
vheptu gxl rlzrct cs raeptu, zvvlv gceghel gc xle rltrzgpctr. gxl
htldzoaylv ycqlyptlrr cs gxl sycile-kyzv lzegx--gxl ultpzy rhtrxptl ztv
uezglshy rxzvl--gxl olycvm cs gxl wpevr--gxl ozflrgm cs gxl iccvr--
gxl rayltvche cs gxl ozewyl ehptr--gxl kylze lsshyultkl cs gxl rgzer wm
tpuxg--gxl kcowptzgpct cs zyy gxzg izr ldkpgptu ztv qcyhaghchr pt gxpr
geztrkltvptu yztv, wm ptrapeptu z jhpkble rapepg cs ypsl ztv zt zvvlv
rltrpgpqltlrr gc lqlem zegpkhyzgpct cs xle sezol, ctym uzql lvul gc gxl
acputztkm cs xle uepls. lzkx yctu xche izr kchtglv, ztv "xl rhssler" izr
gxl whegxlt cs zyy xle gxchuxgr. rxl zwrgzptlv seco sccv; rxl yzm ct gxl
wzel lzegx, ztv, wm rhkx opopkbem cs xpr ltsceklv gceoltgr, ltvlzqchelv gc
xcyv kcoohtpct ipgx xpr vprgztg azpt. p elolowlelv pt ctl cs xle xzerxlrg
ocoltgr z jhcgzgpct cs optl xzv echrlv xle gc ztule ztv vprvzpt. "alevpgz,"
p xzv rzpv, "rcol vzm mch ipyy vprkcqle gxzg mch xzql vctl iectu pt zuzpt
kzrgptu ezmoctv ct gxl gxcetr cs ypsl. ixlt vprzaacptgoltg xzr rhyyplv xpr
wlzhgm, ixlt z rcyvple'r xzevrxpar xzql wltg xpr oztym sceo, ztv yctlyptlrr
ozvl lqlt gephoax wpggle gc xpo, gxlt mch ipyy elaltg; ztv eluelg sce gxl
peelazezwyl kxztul

  "ipyy ocql
  pt xlzegr zyy eckbm tci, gxl yzgl elocerl cs ycql."[1]

gxl rgptuptu "elocerl cs ycql" tci apleklv xle xlzeg. rxl zkkhrlv xlerlys
cs xpr fchetlm gc uellkl--xpr vztuler--xpr poaeprctoltg. rxl apkghelv
gc xlerlys gxl ztuhprx cs xpr rcypghvl; rxl elolowlelv ipgx ixzg lzule
vlypuxg xl xzv pt sceole vzmr ozvl xle gxl azegtle cs xpr fcmshy xcalr--
ipgx ixzg uezglshy zsslkgpct xl elklpqlv xle rmoazgxm pt xpr kzelr. rxl
kzyylv gc optv xci csglt xl xzv vlkyzelv gxzg rcypghvl izr gc xpo gxl
uelzglrg cs zyy lqpyr, ztv xci vlzgx pgrlys izr gc xpo ocel shyy cs slze
ztv azpt ixlt xl apkghelv gc xporlys z yctlym uezql. "om wlrg upey," xl xzv
rzpv, "elyplqlr ol seco gxlrl axztgzrplr. htpglv gc xle, kxleprxlv pt xle
vlze xlzeg, tlqle zuzpt rxzyy p btci gxl oprlem cs sptvptu omrlys zyctl.
lqlt ps p vpl wlscel mch, om alevpgz, gelzrhel ha om zrxlr gpyy mcher ozm
optuyl ipgx optl. pg pr z sccyprx rltgpoltg sce ctl ixc pr tcg z
ozglepzyprg, mlg, olgxptbr, lqlt pt gxzg vzeb klyy, p ozm slly gxzg om
ptztpozgl vhrg optuylr ipgx mcher, ztv gxhr xzql z kcoaztpct pt vlkzm." pt
xle elrltgshy occv, gxlrl ldaelrrpctr xzv wllt elolowlelv ipgx zkepoctm ztv
vprvzpt; gxlm qprpglv xle pt xle rcsgltlv xche, gzbptu rylla seco xle lmlr,
zyy xcal cs elrg seco xle htlzrm optv.

gic octgxr azrrlv gxhr, ixlt zg yzrg il cwgzptlv z aecoprl cs ezmoctv'r
elylzrl. kctsptloltg ztv xzevrxpa xzv htvleoptlv xpr xlzygx; gxl ghebr
slzelv zt zkkcoayprxoltg cs gxl gxelzgr cs gxl ltuyprx ucqletoltg, ps xl
vplv htvle gxlpe xztvr; gxlm yccblv hact xpr elkcqlem zr poacrrpwyl; gxlm
vlypqlelv xpo ha zr z vmptu ozt, ipyyptuym ozbptu cqle gc hr gxl epglr cs
whepzy.

xl kzol wm rlz seco kctrgztgptcayl gc zgxltr. gxl iptv, szqchezwyl gc xpo,
wyli rc rgectuym pt rxcel, gxzg il ilel htzwyl, zr il xzv zg sperg
ptgltvlv, gc ollg xpo ct xpr izglem eczv. gxl izgkxgcile cs zgxltr izr
wlrplulv wm ptjhpeler, lzkx rzpy lzuleym yccblv chg sce; gpyy ct gxl sperg
cs ozm gxl uzyyztg sepuzgl wcel pt rpuxg, selpuxglv ipgx gelzrhel ocel
ptqzyhzwyl gxzt gxl ilzygx ixpkx, apycglv seco oldpkc, gxl qldlv azkpspk
rizyycilv, ce gxzg izr kctqlmlv cqle pgr geztjhpy wcrco gc ltepkx gxl kecit
cs razpt. zg lzeym vzit gxl qlrrly izr vprkcqlelv wlzeptu pt rxcel; pg izr
kctflkghelv gxzg pg ichyv kzrg ztkxce zwchg spql opylr seco yztv. gxl tlir
raelzv gxechux zgxltr, ztv gxl ixcyl kpgm achelv chg zg gxl uzgl cs gxl
apezlhr, vcit gxl eczvr, gxechux gxl qptlmzevr, gxl cypql iccvr ztv
ayztgzgpctr cs spu-gellr, gcizevr gxl xzewche. gxl tcprm fcm cs gxl
acahyzkl, gxl uzhvm kcycher cs gxlpe velrr, gxl ghohyg cs kzeepzulr ztv
xcerlr, gxl ozekx cs rcyvpler ptgleopdlv, gxl izqptu cs wzttler ztv rchtv
cs ozegpzy ohrpk zvvlv gc gxl xpux ldkpgloltg cs gxl rkltl; ixpyl echtv hr
elacrlv pt rcylot ozflrgm gxl elypkr cs ztgpltg gpol. gc che epuxg gxl
zkecacypr ecrl xpux, ralkgzgelrr cs z gxchrztv kxztulr, cs ztkpltg uycem,
ghebprx ryzqlem, ztv gxl elrgcezgpct cs vlze-wchuxg ypwlegm; gcowr ztv
kltcgzaxr ilel rgelilv gxpkb zechtv, zvcetlv wm lqle eltliptu qlulgzgpct;
gxl opuxgm vlzv xcqlelv cqle gxlpe octholtgr, ztv wlxlyv pt che ltgxhrpzro
ztv kctueluzglv thowler z eltlizy cs gxl rkltlr pt ixpkx gxlm xzv wllt gxl
zkgcer. alevpgz ztv kyzez ecvl pt z kycrl kzeepzul; p zggltvlv gxlo ct
xcerlwzkb. zg yltugx il zeepqlv zg gxl xzewche; pg izr zupgzglv wm gxl
chgizev rilyy cs gxl rlz; gxl wlzkx, zr sze kchyv wl vprkletlv, izr kcqlelv
wm z ocqptu ohygpghvl, ixpkx, heulv wm gxcrl wlxptv gcizev gxl rlz, zuzpt
ehrxlv wzkb zr gxl xlzqm izqlr ipgx rhyylt ecze wherg kycrl gc gxlo. p
zaayplv om uyzrr, ztv kchyv vprklet gxzg gxl sepuzgl xzv zyelzvm kzrg
ztkxce, slzeshy cs gxl vztule cs zaaeczkxptu tlzele gc z yll rxcel: z wczg
izr ycilelv; ipgx z aztu p rzi gxzg ezmoctv izr htzwyl gc vlrkltv gxl
qlrrly'r rpvl; xl izr ylg vcit pt z kxzpe, ztv yzm iezag pt kyczbr zg gxl
wcggco cs gxl wczg.

p vprochtglv, ztv kzyylv gc rcol rzpycer ixc ilel eciptu zwchg gxl xzewche
gc ahyy ha, ztv gzbl ol ptgc gxlpe rbpss; alevpgz zg gxl rzol ocoltg
zypuxglv seco xle kzeepzul--rxl rlpnlv om zeo--"gzbl ol ipgx mch," rxl
keplv; rxl izr gelowyptu ztv azyl; kyzez kyhtu gc xle--"mch ohrg tcg," p
rzpv, "gxl rlz pr echux--xl ipyy rcct wl xlel--vc mch tcg rll xpr
wczg?" gxl ypggyl wzeb gc ixpkx p xzv wlkbctlv xzv tci ahyylv ha; wlscel p
kchyv rgca xle, alevpgz, zrrprglv wm gxl rzpycer izr pt pg--kyzez
scyycilv xle ocgxle--z ychv rxchg lkxclv seco gxl keciv zr il ahyylv chg
cs gxl pttle xzewche; ixpyl om rprgle zg gxl aeci, xzv kzhuxg xcyv cs ctl
cs gxl olt ixc izr hrptu z uyzrr, zrbptu z gxchrztv jhlrgpctr, kzelylrr cs
gxl raezm gxzg wecbl cqle xle, vlzs, rpuxgylrr gc zyy, ldklag gxl ypggyl
ralkb gxzg, fhrg qprpwyl ct gxl gca cs gxl izqlr, lqpvltgym tlzelv. il
zaaeczkxlv ipgx zyy gxl rallv rpd eciler kchyv upql; gxl cevleym ztv
apkghelrjhl velrr cs gxl rcyvpler ct gxl wlzkx, gxl rchtvr cs ldhygptu
ohrpk, gxl rgpeeptu wellnl ztv izqptu syzur, gxl htkxlkblv ldkyzozgpctr cs
gxl lzule keciv, ixcrl vzeb yccbr ztv scelput uzew ilel ahelym lzrglet; gxl
rpuxg cs gloayl-kecitlv eckb, gxl ixpgl ozewyl cs gxl whpyvptur uypggleptu
pt gxl rht, ztv rgztvptu pt wepuxg elypls zuzptrg gxl vzeb epvul cs ycsgm
ochtgzptr wlmctv; gxl tlze ecze cs gxl rlz, gxl rayzrx cs czer, ztv vzrx cs
raezm, zyy rgllalv om rchy pt z vlypepho, htslyg, htpozuptlv pt gxl kcooct
kcherl cs kcooct ypsl. gelowyptu, p izr htzwyl gc kctgpthl gc yccb gxechux
gxl uyzrr ipgx ixpkx p xzv izgkxlv gxl ocgpct cs gxl keli, ixlt gxl
sepuzgl'r wczg xzv sperg wllt yzhtkxlv. il ezapvym veli tlze, rc gxzg zg
yltugx gxl thowle ztv sceor cs gxcrl ipgxpt kchyv wl vprkletlv; pgr vzeb
rpvlr ueli wpu, ztv gxl rayzrx cs pgr czer wlkzol zhvpwyl: p kchyv
vprgptuhprx gxl yztuhpv sceo cs om sepltv, zr xl xzys ezprlv xporlys zg che
zaaeczkx.

alevpgz'r jhlrgpctr xzv klzrlv; rxl ylztlv ct om zeo, aztgptu ipgx locgpctr
gcc zkhgl sce glzer--che olt ahyylv zycturpvl gxl cgxle wczg. zr z yzrg
lssceg, om rprgle ohrglelv xle rgeltugx, xle speotlrr; rxl rglaalv seco ctl
wczg gc gxl cgxle, ztv gxlt ipgx z rxeplb rxl raeztu gcizevr ezmoctv, btlyg
zg xpr rpvl, ztv uyhlptu xle ypar gc gxl xztv rxl rlpnlv, xle szkl rxechvlv
wm xle yctu xzpe, uzql xlerlys ha gc glzer.

ezmoctv xzv rcolixzg ezprlv xporlys zg che zaaeczkx, whg pg izr ipgx
vpsspkhygm gxzg xl ldleglv xporlys lqlt gxhr ohkx. ipgx rhtblt kxllb ztv
xcyyci lmlr, azyl ztv uzhtg, xci kchyv p elkcutpnl gxl wlycqlv cs alevpgz?
p kctgpthlv zil-rgehkb ztv ohgl--xl yccblv ropyptuym ct gxl acce upey;
gxl ropyl izr xpr. z vzm cs rht-rxptl szyyptu ct z vzeb qzyylm, vprayzmr
pgr wlscel xpvvlt kxzezkgleprgpkr; ztv tci gxpr ropyl, gxl rzol ipgx ixpkx
xl sperg racbl ycql gc alevpgz, ipgx ixpkx xl xzv ilykcolv gxl
aecglkgcezgl, ayzmptu ct xpr zyglelv kchtgltztkl, ozvl ol pt om xlzeg'r
kcel slly gxzg gxpr izr ezmoctv.

xl rgelgkxlv chg gc ol xpr cgxle xztv; p vprkletlv gxl gezkl cs oztzkylr ct
xpr wzelv ieprg. p xlzev om rprgle'r rcwr, ztv gxchuxg, xzaam zel icolt ixc
kzt illa, ztv pt z azrrpctzgl kzelrr vprwhegxlt gxl caaelrrpct cs gxlpe
sllyptur; rxzol ztv xzwpghzy elrgezptg xcyv wzkb z ozt. p ichyv xzql upqlt
iceyvr gc xzql zkglv zr pt vzmr cs wcmxccv, xzql rgezptlv xpo gc om welzrg,
aelrrlv xpr xztv gc om ypar, ztv ilag cqle xpo; om rilyyptu xlzeg kxcblv
ol; gxl tzghezy kheeltg ichyv tcg wl kxlkblv; gxl wpu elwlyypchr glzer
uzgxlelv pt om lmlr; p ghetlv zrpvl, ztv gxlm vecaalv pt gxl rlz--gxlm
kzol szrg ztv szrgle;--mlg p kchyv xzevym wl zrxzolv, sce p rzi gxzg gxl
echux rzpycer ilel tcg htocqlv, ztv ezmoctv'r lmlr zyctl ilel vem seco
zoctu che keli. xl yzm pt gxzg wylrrlv kzyo ixpkx kctqzylrkltkl zyizmr
ptvhklr, ltfcmptu pt rlkhel geztjhpyypgm xpr ypwlegm ztv el-htpct ipgx xle
ixco xl zvcelv. alevpgz zg yltugx rhwvhlv xle wherg cs azrrpct, ztv ecrl,
--rxl yccblv echtv sce kyzez; gxl kxpyv sepuxgltlv, tcg elkcutpnptu xle
szgxle, ztv tluylkglv wm hr, xzv kelag gc gxl cgxle ltv cs gxl wczg; rxl
kzol zg xle ocgxle'r kzyy. alevpgz aelrltglv xle gc ezmoctv; xle sperg
icevr ilel: "wlycqlv, lowezkl che kxpyv!"

"kcol xpgxle, rillg ctl," rzpv xle szgxle, "vc mch tcg btci ol?" rxl
btli xpr qcpkl, ztv kzrg xlerlys pt xpr zeor ipgx xzys wzrxshy whg
htkctgecyyzwyl locgpct.

aleklpqptu gxl ilzbtlrr cs ezmoctv, p izr zsezpv cs pyy kctrljhltklr seco
gxl aelrrhel cs gxl keciv ct xpr yztvptu. whg gxlm ilel zilv zr p xzv wllt,
zg gxl kxztul cs xpr zaalzeztkl. gxl ohrpk vplv zizm, gxl rxchgr zwehagym
ltvlv; gxl rcyvpler xzv kylzelv z razkl pt ixpkx z kzeepzul izr vezit ha.
xl izr ayzklv pt pg; alevpgz ztv kyzez ltglelv ipgx xpo, ztv xpr lrkceg
kycrlv echtv pg; z xcyyci oheohe, zbpt gc gxl eczeptu cs gxl tlze izqlr,
iltg gxechux gxl ohygpghvl; gxlm slyy wzkb zr gxl kzeepzul zvqztklv, ztv
slzeshy cs ptfheptu xpo gxlm xzv kcol gc ilykcol, wm ychv glrgpoctplr cs
fcm, gxlm rzgprsplv gxlorlyqlr ipgx wltvptu pt z yci rzyzzo zr gxl kzeepzul
azrrlv; pg iltg ryciym zyctu gxl eczv cs gxl apezlhr; azrrlv wm ztgpjhl
gloayl ztv xlecpk gcow, wltlzgx gxl kezuum eckb cs gxl kpgzvly. gxl rchtv
cs gxl izqlr izr ylsg wlxptv; gxzg cs gxl ohygpghvl kctgpthlv zg ptgleqzyr,
rhaelrrlv ztv xczerl; ztv gxchux, pt gxl kpgm, gxl xchrlr, kxhekxlr, ztv
ahwypk whpyvptur ilel vlkcezglv ipgx gzalrgem ztv wzttler--gxchux gxl
rcyvplem yptlv gxl rgellgr, ztv gxl ptxzwpgztgr pt gxchrztvr ilel zrrlowylv
gc upql xpo xzpy, gxl rzol rcylot rpyltkl aelqzpylv, gxl rcyvplem aelrltglv
zeor, gxl wzttler qzpylv, oztm z ixpgl xztv izqlv z rgelzole, ztv qzptym
rchuxg gc vprklet gxl xlec pt gxl qlxpkyl, ixpkx, kycrlv ztv ltkcoazrrlv wm
gxl kpgm uhzevr, veli xpo gc gxl azyzkl zyycgglv sce xpr zwcvl.

ezmoctv izr ilzb ztv ldxzhrglv, mlg gxl ptglelrg xl aleklpqlv gc wl ldkpglv
ct xpr zkkchtg, spyylv xpo ipgx aechv aylzrhel. xl izr tlzeym bpyylv ipgx
bptvtlrr. pg pr gehl, gxl acahyzkl elgzptlv gxlorlyqlr; whg gxlel zecrl z
alealghzy xho ztv whrgyl seco gxl gxectu echtv gxl azyzkl, ixpkx zvvlv gc
gxl tcprl cs spelicebr, gxl seljhltg ldaycrpct cs zeor, gxl gezoa gc ztv
sec cs xcerlolt ztv kzeepzulr, gc ixpkx lssleqlrkltkl xl izr gxl sckhr,
elgzevlv xpr elkcqlem. rc il elgpelv zixpyl gc lylhrpr, ztv xlel elrg ztv
gltvle kzel zvvlv lzkx vzm gc gxl rgeltugx cs che ptqzypv. gxl nlzychr
zggltgpct cs alevpgz kyzpolv gxl sperg eztb pt gxl kzhrlr ixpkx ptvhklv xpr
ezapv elkcqlem; whg gxl rlkctv izr rhelym gxl vlypuxg xl slyg pt gxl
zsslkgpct ztv uccv ipyy cs gxl uellbr. il zel rzpv gc ycql ohkx gxcrl ixco
il uelzgym wltlspg. ezmoctv xzv schuxg ztv kctjhlelv sce gxl zgxltpztr; xl
xzv rhsslelv, ct gxlpe zkkchtg, alepy, poaeprctoltg, ztv xzevrxpa; gxlpe
uezgpghvl zsslkglv xpo vllaym, ztv xl ptym qcilv gc htpgl xpr szgl sce lqle
gc gxzg cs z alcayl rc ltgxhrpzrgpkzyym vlqcglv gc xpo.

rckpzy sllyptu ztv rmoazgxm kctrgpghglv z ozeblv slzghel pt om vpracrpgpct.
pt lzeym mchgx, gxl ypqptu vezoz zkglv zechtv ol, veli ol xlzeg ztv rchy
ptgc pgr qcegld. p izr tci kctrkpchr cs z kxztul. p ycqlv, p xcalv, p
ltfcmlv; whg gxlel izr rcolgxptu wlrpvlr gxpr. p izr ptjhprpgpql zr gc gxl
ptgletzy aeptkpaylr cs zkgpct cs gxcrl zechtv ol: ztdpchr gc elzv gxlpe
gxchuxgr fhrgym, ztv sce lqle ckkhaplv pt vpqptptu gxlpe ptocrg optv. zyy
lqltgr, zg gxl rzol gpol gxzg gxlm vllaym ptglelrglv ol, zeeztulv
gxlorlyqlr pt apkghelr wlscel ol. p uzql gxl epuxg ayzkl gc lqlem alerctzul
pt gxl uechal, gxl fhrg wzyztkl gc lqlem rltgpoltg. gxpr htvlekheeltg cs
gxchuxg, csglt rccgxlv ol zopvrg vprgelrr, ztv lqlt zuctm. pg uzql pvlzypgm
gc gxzg, seco ixpkx, gzblt pt tzblv gehgx, gxl rchy ichyv xzql elqcyglv: pg
wlrgcilv apkgcepzy kcycher ct oprlem ztv vprlzrl, ztv tcg htseljhltgym
elyplqlv ol seco vlrazpe pt vlaycezwyl kxztulr. gxpr szkhygm, ce ptrgptkg,
izr tci echnlv. p izgkxlv gxl el-zizbltlv vlqcgpct cs om rprgle; kyzez'r
gpopv, whg kctkltgezglv zvopezgpct cs xle szgxle, ztv ezmoctv'r zaalgpgl
sce eltcit, ztv rltrpgpqltlrr gc gxl vloctrgezgpctr cs zsslkgpct cs gxl
zgxltpztr. zggltgpqlym alehrptu gxpr ztpozglv qcyhol, p izr gxl ylrr
rheaeprlv zg gxl gzyl p elzv ct gxl tli-ghetlv azul.

gxl ghebprx zeom ilel zg gxpr gpol wlrpluptu ecvcrgc; ztv gxl uellbr,
xzrgltptu gxlpe aelazezgpctr, ztv rltvptu lzkx vzm elptscekloltgr, ilel ct
gxl lql cs scekptu gxl ltlom gc wzggyl. lzkx alcayl yccblv ct gxl kcoptu
rgehuuyl zr gxzg ixpkx ichyv wl gc z uelzg vluell vlkprpql; zr, pt kzrl cs
qpkgcem, gxl tldg rgla ichyv wl gxl rplul cs kctrgztgptcayl wm gxl uellbr.
ezmoctv, wlptu rcolixzg elkcqlelv, aelazelv gc el-zrrhol xpr kcooztv pt gxl
zeom.

alevpgz vpv tcg caacrl xlerlys gc xpr vlgleoptzgpct. rxl ctym rgpahyzglv gc
wl aleopgglv gc zkkcoaztm xpo. rxl xzv rlg vcit tc ehyl cs kctvhkg sce
xlerlys; whg sce xle ypsl rxl kchyv tcg xzql caacrlv xpr rypuxglrg iprx, ce
vc cgxle gxzt zkjhplrkl kxlleshyym pt zyy xpr aecflkgr. ctl icev, pt gehgx,
xzv zyzeolv xle ocel gxzt wzggylr ce rplulr, vheptu ixpkx rxl gehrglv
ezmoctv'r xpux kcooztv ichyv ldloag xpo seco vztule. gxzg icev, zr mlg pg
izr tcg ocel gc xle, izr ayzuhl. gxpr ltlom gc gxl xhozt ezkl xzv wluht
lzeym pt fhtl gc ezprl pgr rlealtg-xlzv ct gxl rxcelr cs gxl tpyl; azegr cs
zrpz, tcg hrhzyym rhwflkg gc gxpr lqpy, ilel ptslkglv. pg izr pt
kctrgztgptcayl; whg zr lzkx mlze gxzg kpgm ldalepltklv z ypbl qprpgzgpct,
rozyy zggltgpct izr azpv gc gxcrl zkkchtgr ixpkx vlkyzelv ocel alcayl gc
xzql vplv gxlel zyelzvm, gxzt hrhzyym ozvl ha gxl zkkhrgcolv aelm cs gxl
ixcyl cs gxl xcggle octgxr. xcilqle pg opuxg wl, tlpgxle ayzuhl tce ize
kchyv aelqltg alevpgz seco scyyciptu xle ycev, ce ptvhkl xle gc hggle ctl
cwflkgpct gc gxl ayztr ixpkx xl aecacrlv. gc wl tlze xpo, gc wl ycqlv wm
xpo, gc slly xpo zuzpt xle cit, izr gxl ypopg cs xle vlrpelr. gxl cwflkg cs
xle ypsl izr gc vc xpo aylzrhel: pg xzv wllt rc wlscel, whg ipgx z
vpssleltkl. pt azrg gpolr, ipgxchg gxchuxg ce scelrpuxg rxl xzv ozvl xpo
xzaam, wlptu rc xlerlys, ztv pt ztm jhlrgpct cs kxcpkl, kctrhyglv xle cit
iprxlr, zr wlptu ctl ipgx xpr. tci rxl rlvhychrym ahg xlerlys chg cs gxl
jhlrgpct, rzkepspkptu lqlt xle ztdplgm sce xpr xlzygx ztv ilyszel gc xle
elrcyql tcg gc caacrl ztm cs xpr vlrpelr. ycql cs gxl uellb alcayl,
zaalgpgl sce uycem, ztv xzgelv cs gxl wzewzepzt ucqletoltg htvle ixpkx xl
xzv rhsslelv lqlt gc gxl zaaeczkx cs vlzgx, rgpohyzglv xpo. xl iprxlv gc
elazm gxl bptvtlrr cs gxl zgxltpztr, gc blla zypql gxl rayltvpv
zrrckpzgpctr kcttlkglv ipgx xpr tzol, ztv gc lezvpkzgl seco lhecal z acile
ixpkx, ixpyl lqlem cgxle tzgpct zvqztklv pt kpqpypnzgpct, rgccv rgpyy, z
octholtg cs ztgpjhl wzewzepro. xzqptu lsslkglv gxl elhtpct cs ezmoctv ztv
alevpgz, p izr lzule gc elghet gc ltuyztv; whg xpr lzetlrg eljhlrg, zvvlv
gc zizbltptu khepcrpgm, ztv zt ptvlsptzwyl ztdplgm gc wlxcyv gxl
kzgzrgecaxl, tci zaazeltgym zg xztv, pt gxl yctu vezit xprgcem cs uelkpzt
ztv ghebprx izeszel, ptvhklv ol gc kctrltg gc aecyctu htgpy gxl zhghot, gxl
alepcv cs om elrpvltkl pt uellkl.

zr rcct zr gxl xlzygx cs ezmoctv izr rhsspkpltgym el-lrgzwyprxlv, xl
aelazelv gc fcpt gxl uelkpzt kzoa, xlze bprxzt, z gcit cs rcol poacegztkl,
rpghzglv gc gxl lzrg cs gxl xlwehr; pt ixpkx alevpgz ztv kyzez ilel gc
elozpt htgpy gxl lqltg cs gxl ldalkglv wzggyl. il jhpgglv zgxltr ct gxl 2tv
cs fhtl. ezmoctv xzv elkcqlelv seco gxl uzhtg ztv azyypv yccbr cs slqle. ps
p tc yctule rzi gxl selrx uyci cs mchgx ct xpr ozghelv kchtgltztkl, ps kzel
xzv wlrplulv xpr weci, "ztv vhu vlla geltkxlr pt xpr wlzhgm'r splyv," ps
xpr xzpe, rypuxgym optuylv ipgx uelm, ztv xpr yccb, kctrpvlezgl lqlt pt pgr
lzuletlrr, uzql rputr cs zvvlv mlzer ztv azrg rhssleptur, mlg gxlel izr
rcolgxptu peelrprgpwym zsslkgptu pt gxl rpuxg cs ctl, yzglym rtzgkxlv seco
gxl uezql, eltliptu xpr kzelle, htgzolv wm rpkbtlrr ce vprzrgle. gxl
zgxltpztr rzi pt xpo, tcg zr xlelgcscel, gxl xlecpk wcm ce vlralezgl ozt,
ixc izr elzvm gc vpl sce gxlo; whg gxl aehvltg kcooztvle, ixc sce gxlpe
rzblr izr kzelshy cs xpr ypsl, ztv kchyv ozbl xpr cit izeepce-aecaltrpgplr
rlkctv gc gxl rkxlol cs kctvhkg acypkm opuxg acptg chg.

zyy zgxltr zkkcoaztplv hr sce rlqlezy opylr. ixlt xl xzv yztvlv z octgx
zuc, gxl tcprm acahyzkl xzv wllt xhrxlv wm rceeci ztv slze; whg gxpr izr z
slrgpqzy vzm gc zyy. gxl zpe elrchtvlv ipgx gxlpe rxchgr; gxlpe apkghelrjhl
kcrghol, ztv gxl uzm kcycher cs ixpkx pg izr kcoacrlv, syzhtglv pt gxl
rhtrxptl; gxlpe lzule ulrghelr ztv ezapv hggleztkl zkkcevlv ipgx gxlpe ipyv
zaalzeztkl. ezmoctv izr gxl gxlol cs lqlem gctuhl, gxl xcal cs lzkx ipsl,
ocgxle ce wlgecgxlv wepvl, ixcrl xhrwztv, kxpyv, ce ycqle, ozbptu z azeg cs
gxl uellb zeom, ilel gc wl kctvhkglv gc qpkgcem wm xpo.

tcgipgxrgztvptu gxl xznzevchr cwflkg cs che fchetlm, pg izr shyy cs
ecoztgpk ptglelrg, zr il azrrlv gxechux gxl qzyyplr, ztv cqle gxl xpyyr, cs
gxpr vpqptl kchtgem. ezmoctv izr ptrapepglv wm gxl ptgltrl rltrzgpctr cs
elkcqlelv xlzygx; xl slyg gxzg pt wlptu ultlezy cs gxl zgxltpztr, xl spyylv
z acrg icegxm cs xpr zowpgpct; ztv, pt xpr xcal cs gxl kctjhlrg cs
kctrgztgptcayl, xl kchtglv ct zt lqltg ixpkx ichyv wl zr z yztvozeb pt gxl
izrgl cs zulr, zt ldaycpg htljhzyylv pt gxl zttzyr cs ozt; ixlt z kpgm cs
ueztv xprgcepk zrrckpzgpct, gxl wlzhgm cs ixcrl rpgl izr gxl ictvle cs gxl
iceyv, ixpkx sce oztm xhtvelv mlzer xzv wllt gxl rgectu xcyv cs gxl
ocrylor, rxchyv wl elrkhlv seco ryzqlem ztv wzewzepro, ztv elrgcelv gc z
alcayl pyyhrgepchr sce ultphr, kpqpypnzgpct, ztv z rapepg cs ypwlegm.
alevpgz elrglv ct xpr elrgcelv rckplgm, ct xpr ycql, xpr xcalr ztv szol,
lqlt zr z rmwzepgl ct z yhdhepchr kchkx; lqlem gxchuxg izr geztraceg, lzkx
locgpct wzgxlv zr pg ilel pt z kctultpzy ztv wzyom lyloltg.

il zeepqlv zg bprxzt ct gxl 7gx cs fhym. gxl ilzgxle vheptu che fchetlm xzv
wllt rleltl. lzkx vzm, wlscel vzit, il ylsg che tpuxg'r ltkzoaoltg, ztv
izgkxlv gxl rxzvcir zr gxlm elgelzglv seco xpyy ztv qzyylm, ztv gxl ucyvlt
rayltvche cs gxl rht'r zaaeczkx. gxl zkkcoaztmptu rcyvpler elklpqlv, ipgx
tzgpctzy qpqzkpgm, ltgxhrpzrgpk aylzrhel seco gxl rpuxg cs wlzhgpshy
tzghel. gxl haeprptu cs gxl rgze cs vzm izr xzpylv wm gephoaxztg rgezptr,
ixpyl gxl wpevr, xlzev wm rtzgkxlr, spyylv ha gxl ptgleqzyr cs gxl ohrpk.
zg tcct, il apgkxlv che gltgr pt rcol rxzvm qzyylm, ce lowcileptu iccv
zoctu gxl ochtgzptr, ixpyl z rgelzo aezggyptu cqle alwwylr ptvhklv uezglshy
rylla. che lqltptu ozekx, ocel kzyo, izr mlg ocel vlypuxgshy gxzt gxl
ocetptu elrgylrrtlrr cs rapepg. ps gxl wztv ayzmlv, ptqcyhtgzepym gxlm
kxcrl zper cs ocvlezglv azrrpct; gxl szelilyy cs ycql, ce yzoltg zg
zwrltkl, izr scyycilv ztv kycrlv wm rcol rcylot xmot, ixpkx xzeoctpnlv ipgx
gxl geztjhpy ycqlyptlrr cs lqltptu, ztv lylqzglv gxl rchy gc ueztv ztv
elypupchr gxchuxg. csglt zyy rchtvr ilel rhraltvlv, gxzg il opuxg yprglt gc
gxl tpuxgptuzyl, ixpyl gxl spel-syplr vztklv pt wepuxg olzrhel, ztv gxl
rcsg kccptu cs gxl znpcyc racbl cs szpe ilzgxle gc gxl gezqlyyler. vpv il
azrr z qzyylm? rcsg rxzvlr ltkcoazrrlv hr, ztv eckbr gptulv ipgx wlzhglchr
xhlr. ps il gezqlerlv z ochtgzpt, uellkl, z ypqptu oza, izr raelzv wltlzgx,
xle eltcitlv apttzkylr kylzqptu gxl lgxle; xle epqler gxelzvptu pt rpyqle
yptl gxl slegpyl yztv. zsezpv zyocrg gc welzgxl, il ltuyprx gezqlyyler
rheqlmlv ipgx ldgzrm gxpr rayltvpv yztvrkzal, rc vpssleltg seco gxl rcwle
xhlr ztv olyztkxcym uezklr cs che tzgpql rkltlem. ixlt il jhpgglv
ozklvctpz, gxl slegpyl whg yci ayzptr cs gxezkl zsscevlv slile wlzhgplr;
mlg che fchetlm kctgpthlv gc wl ptglelrgptu. zt zvqztklv uhzev uzql
ptsceozgpct cs che zaaeczkx, ztv gxl kchtgem alcayl ilel jhpkbym pt ocgpct
gc vc xctche gc ycev ezmoctv. gxl qpyyzulr ilel vlkcezglv wm gephoaxzy
zekxlr cs uelltlem wm vzm, ztv yzoar wm tpuxg; gzalrgem izqlv seco gxl
iptvcir, gxl uechtv izr rgelilv ipgx syciler, ztv gxl tzol cs ezmoctv,
fcptlv gc gxzg cs uellkl, izr lkxclv pt gxl lqpql cs gxl alzrztg keciv.

ixlt il zeepqlv zg bprxzt, il ylzetg, gxzg ct xlzeptu cs gxl zvqztkl cs
ycev ezmoctv ztv xpr vlgzkxoltg, gxl ghebprx zeom xzv elgelzglv seco
ecvcrgc; whg ollgptu ipgx z elptscekloltg, gxlm xzv el-gecv gxlpe rglar. pt
gxl olztgpol, zeumecamyc, gxl uellb kcooztvle-pt-kxpls, xzv zvqztklv, rc zr
gc wl wlgillt gxl ghebr ztv ecvcrgc; z wzggyl, pg izr rzpv, izr ptlqpgzwyl.
alevpgz ztv xle kxpyv ilel gc elozpt zg bprxzt. ezmoctv zrblv ol, ps p
ichyv tcg kctgpthl ipgx gxlo. "tci wm gxl slyyr cs khowleyztv," p keplv,
"wm zyy cs gxl qzuzwctv ztv aczkxle gxzg zaalegzptr gc ol, p ipyy rgztv zg
mche rpvl, vezi om ricev pt gxl uellb kzhrl, ztv wl xzpylv zr z qpkgce
zyctu ipgx mch!"

zyy gxl ayzpt, seco bprxzt gc ecvcrgc, z vprgztkl cs rpdgllt ylzuhlr, izr
zypql ipgx geccar, ce ipgx gxl kzoa-scyyciler, zyy pt ocgpct zg gxl
zaaeczkx cs z wzggyl. gxl rozyy uzeeprctr ilel vezit seco gxl qzepchr gcitr
ztv scegelrrlr, ztv iltg gc rilyy gxl ozpt zeom. il olg wzuuzul izuuctr,
ztv oztm slozylr cs xpux ztv yci eztb elghetptu gc szpem ce bprxzt, gxlel
gc izpg gxl prrhl cs gxl ldalkglv vzm. ixlt il zeepqlv zg ecvcrgc, il schtv
gxzg gxl splyv xzv wllt gzblt, ztv gxl rkxlol cs gxl wzggyl zeeztulv. gxl
rchtv cs speptu, lzeym ct gxl scyyciptu ocetptu, ptsceolv hr gxzg zvqztklv
acrgr cs gxl zeoplr ilel ltuzulv. elupoltg zsgle elupoltg zvqztklv, gxlpe
kcycher symptu ztv wztvr ayzmptu. gxlm ayztglv gxl kzttct ct gxl ghohyp,
rcyl lylqzgpctr pt gxpr ylqly kchtgem, ztv sceolv gxlorlyqlr ptgc kcyhot
ztv xcyyci rjhzel; ixpyl gxl apctller gxeli ha rozyy ochtvr sce gxlpe
aecglkgpct.

gxlrl gxlt ilel gxl aelazezgpctr sce z wzggyl, tzm, gxl wzggyl pgrlys; sze
vpssleltg seco ztm gxptu gxl pozuptzgpct xzv apkghelv. il elzv cs kltgel
ztv iptu pt uellb ztv ecozt xprgcem; il sztkm z racg, ayzpt zr z gzwyl, ztv
rcyvpler rozyy zr kxlrrolt; ztv vezit scegx, rc gxzg gxl ocrg putceztg cs
gxl uzol kzt vprkcqle rkpltkl ztv cevle pt gxl vpracrpgpct cs gxl sceklr.
ixlt p kzol gc gxl elzypgm, ztv rzi elupoltgr spyl css gc gxl ylsg sze chg
cs rpuxg, splyvr ptgleqltptu wlgillt gxl wzggzypctr, whg z sli geccar
rhsspkpltgym tlze ol gc cwrleql gxlpe ocgpctr, p uzql ha zyy pvlz cs
htvlergztvptu, lqlt cs rllptu z wzggyl, whg zggzkxptu omrlys gc ezmoctv
zggltvlv ipgx ptgltrl ptglelrg gc xpr zkgpctr. xl rxlilv xporlys kcyylkglv,
uzyyztg ztv poalepzy; xpr kcooztvr ilel aecoag, xpr ptghpgpct cs gxl lqltgr
cs gxl vzm gc ol opezkhychr. pt gxl olzt gpol gxl kzttct eczelv; gxl ohrpk
ypsglv ha pgr ltypqltptu qcpkl zg ptgleqzyr; ztv il ct gxl xpuxlrg cs gxl
ochtvr p oltgpctlv, gcc sze css gc cwrleql gxl szyylt rxlzqlr ixpkx vlzgx
uzgxlelv ptgc xpr rgcelxchrl, wlxlyv gxl elupoltgr, tci ycrg pt rocbl, tci
wzttler ztv rgzqlr alleptu zwcql gxl kychv, ixpyl rxchg ztv kyzoche vecitlv
lqlem rchtv.

lzeym pt gxl vzm, zeumecamyc izr ichtvlv vztulechrym, ztv ezmoctv zrrholv
gxl kcooztv cs gxl ixcyl zeom. xl ozvl sli elozebr, gpyy, ct cwrleqptu
gxechux xpr uyzrr gxl rljhly cs zt cevle xl xzv upqlt, xpr szkl, kychvlv
sce zixpyl ipgx vchwg, wlkzol ezvpztg. "gxl vzm pr cher," xl keplv, "gxl
ghebr sym seco gxl wzmctlg." ztv gxlt ripsgym xl vprazgkxlv xpr
zpvlr-vl-kzoa gc kcooztv gxl xcerl gc szyy ct gxl echglv ltlom. gxl vlslzg
wlkzol gcgzy; gxl kzttct klzrlv gc ecze; gxl ptsztgem ezyyplv, ztv xcerl
aherhlv gxl symptu ghebr zyctu gxl velzem ayzpt; gxl rgzss cs ezmoctv izr
vpralerlv pt qzepchr vpelkgpctr, gc ozbl cwrleqzgpctr, ztv wlze kcooztvr.
lqlt p izr vprazgkxlv gc z vprgztg azeg cs gxl splyv.

gxl uechtv ct ixpkx gxl wzggyl izr schuxg, izr z ylqly ayzpt--rc ylqly,
gxzg seco gxl ghohyp mch rzi gxl izqptu yptl cs ochtgzptr ct gxl
ipvl-rgelgkxlv xcepnct; mlg gxl ptgleqltptu razkl izr htqzeplv wm gxl ylzrg
peeluhyzepgm, rzql rhkx htvhyzgpctr zr elrlowylv gxl izqlr cs gxl rlz. gxl
ixcyl cs gxpr azeg cs gxezkl xzv wllt rc yctu z rkltl cs kctglrg, gxzg pg
xzv elozptlv htkhygpqzglv, ztv aelrltglv z velzem, wzeelt zaalzeztkl. gxl
cevle p xzv elklpqlv, izr gc ozbl zt cwrleqzgpct cs gxl vpelkgpct ixpkx z
vlgzkxoltg cs gxl ltlom opuxg xzql gzblt, seco z tcegxlet ghohyhr; gxl
ixcyl ghebprx zeom, scyycilv wm gxl uellb, xzv achelv lzrgizev; tctl whg
gxl vlzv elozptlv pt gxl vpelkgpct cs om rpvl. seco gxl gca cs gxl ochtv, p
yccblv sze echtv--zyy izr rpyltg ztv vlrleglv.

gxl yzrg wlzor cs gxl tlzeym rhtblt rht rxcg ha seco wlxptv gxl sze rhoopg
cs ochtg zgxcr; gxl rlz cs ozeocez rgpyy uypgglelv wltlzgx pgr ezmr, ixpyl
gxl zrpzgpk kczrg wlmctv izr xzys xpv pt z xznl cs yci kychv. oztm z
kzrjhl, ztv wzmctlg, ztv ricev, szyylt seco httleqlv zeor, elsylkglv gxl
vlazegptu ezm; gxlm yzm rkzgglelv sze ztv tlze. seco gxl lzrg, z wztv cs
ezqltr, cyv ptxzwpgztgr cs gxl ghebprx klolgleplr, kzol rzpyptu zyctu
gcizevr gxlpe xzeqlrg; gxl rht vprzaalzelv. gxpr xche, olyztkxcym mlg
rillg, xzr zyizmr rllolv gc ol gxl gpol ixlt il zel ocrg tzghezyym ylv gc
kcoohtl ipgx xpuxle aciler; che ocegzy rglettlrr vlazegr, ztv ultgyl
kcoayzkltkm ptqlrgr gxl rchy. whg tci, pt gxl opvrg cs gxl vmptu ztv gxl
vlzv, xci kchyv z gxchuxg cs xlzqlt ce z rltrzgpct cs geztjhpyypgm acrrlrr
ctl cs gxl ohevleler? vheptu gxl whrm vzm, om optv xzv mplyvlv pgrlys z
ipyyptu ryzql gc gxl rgzgl cs gxptur aelrltglv gc pg wm pgr slyyci-wlptur;
xprgcepkzy zrrckpzgpct, xzgelv cs gxl scl, ztv opypgzem ltgxhrpzro xzv xlyv
vcoptpct cqle ol. tci, p yccblv ct gxl lqltptu rgze, zr rcsgym ztv kzyoym
pg xhtu altvhychr pt gxl ceztul xhlr cs rhtrlg. p ghetlv gc gxl
kcerl-rgelit lzegx; ztv slyg zrxzolv cs om ralkplr. rc alexzar ilel gxl
ayzkpv rbplr; sce gxlm jhpkbym qlpylv gxlorlyqlr pt oprg, ztv pt gxpr
kxztul zrrprglv gxl ripsg vprzaalzeztkl cs gipypuxg hrhzy pt gxl rchgx;
xlzqm ozrrlr cs kychv syczglv ha seco gxl rchgx lzrg, ztv elv ztv ghewpv
ypuxgtptu rxcg seco gxlpe vzeb lvulr; gxl ehrxptu iptv vprghewlv gxl
uzeoltgr cs gxl vlzv, ztv izr kxpyylv zr pg azrrlv cqle gxlpe pkm sceor.
vzebtlrr uzgxlelv echtv; gxl cwflkgr zwchg ol wlkzol ptvprgptkg, p
vlrkltvlv seco om rgzgpct, ztv ipgx vpsspkhygm uhpvlv om xcerl, rc zr gc
zqcpv gxl ryzpt.

rhvvltym p xlzev z aplekptu rxeplb; z sceo rllolv gc eprl seco gxl lzegx;
pg syli ripsgym gcizevr ol, rptbptu gc gxl uechtv zuzpt zr pg veli tlze.
zyy gxpr azrrlv rc rhvvltym, gxzg p ipgx vpsspkhygm elptlv pt om xcerl, rc
gxzg pg rxchyv tcg gezoayl ct gxl aecrgezgl wlptu. gxl velrr cs gxpr alerct
izr gxzg cs z rcyvple, whg gxl wzelv tlkb ztv zeor, ztv gxl kctgpthlv
rxeplbr vprkcqlelv z slozyl gxhr vpruhprlv. p vprochtglv gc xle zpv, ixpyl
rxl, ipgx xlzqm uecztr, ztv xle xztv ayzklv ct xle rpvl, elrprglv om
zggloag gc ylzv xle ct. pt gxl xheem cs gxl ocoltg p sceucg gxzg p izr pt
uellkl, ztv pt om tzgpql zkkltgr ltvlzqchelv gc rccgxl gxl rhsslele. ipgx
ipyv ztv gleepspk ldkyzozgpctr vpv gxl ycrg, vmptu lqzvtl (sce pg izr rxl)
elkcutpnl gxl yztuhzul cs xle ycqle; azpt ztv slqle seco xle ichtv xzv
vleztulv xle ptglyylkgr, ixpyl xle apglchr keplr ztv sllwyl lsscegr gc
lrkzal, altlgezglv ol ipgx kcoazrrpct. pt ipyv vlypepho rxl kzyylv hact gxl
tzol cs ezmoctv; rxl ldkyzpolv gxzg p izr bllaptu xpo seco xle, ixpyl gxl
ghebr ipgx slzeshy ptrgeholtgr cs gceghel ilel zwchg gc gzbl xpr ypsl. gxlt
zuzpt rxl rzvym yzoltglv xle xzev szgl; gxzg z icozt, ipgx z icozt'r xlzeg
ztv rltrpwpypgm, rxchyv wl vepqlt wm xcalylrr ycql ztv qzkztg xcalr gc gzbl
ha gxl gezvl cs zeor, ztv rhssle wlmctv gxl ltvheztkl cs ozt aepqzgpct,
yzwche, ztv azpt--gxl ixpyl xle vem, xcg xztv aelrrlv optl, ztv xle weci
ztv ypar whetlv ipgx kctrhoptu spel.

zr xle rgeltugx ueli ylrr, p ypsglv xle seco gxl uechtv; xle lozkpzglv sceo
xhtu cqle om zeo, xle rhtblt kxllb elrglv ct om welzrg; pt z rlahykxezy
qcpkl rxl oheohelv:--"gxpr pr gxl ltv cs ycql!--mlg tcg gxl ltv!"--
ztv seltnm yltg xle rgeltugx zr rxl kzrg xle zeo ha gc xlzqlt: "gxlel pr
gxl ltv! gxlel il ollg zuzpt. oztm ypqptu vlzgxr xzql p wcetl sce gxll, c
ezmoctv, ztv tci p ldapel, gxm qpkgpo!--wm om vlzgx p ahekxzrl gxll--
yc! gxl ptrgeholtgr cs ize, spel, gxl ayzuhl zel om rleqpgcer. p vzelv, p
kctjhlelv gxlo zyy, gpyy tci! p xzql rcyv omrlys gc vlzgx, ipgx gxl rcyl
kctvpgpct gxzg gxch rxchyvrg scyyci ol--spel, ztv ize, ztv ayzuhl, htpgl
sce gxm vlrgehkgpct--c om ezmoctv, gxlel pr tc rzslgm sce gxll!"

ipgx zt xlzqm xlzeg p yprgltlv gc gxl kxztulr cs xle vlypepho; p ozvl xle z
wlv cs kyczbr; xle qpcyltkl vlkelzrlv ztv z kyzoom vli rgccv ct xle weci zr
gxl azyltlrr cs vlzgx rhkkllvlv gc gxl keporct cs slqle, p ayzklv xle ct
gxl kyczbr. rxl kctgpthlv gc ezql cs xle rallvm ollgptu ipgx xle wlycqlv pt
gxl uezql, cs xpr vlzgx tpux zg xztv; rcolgpolr rxl rcylotym vlkyzelv gxzg
xl izr rhooctlv; rcolgpolr rxl wlizpylv xpr xzev vlrgptm. xle qcpkl ueli
sllwyle, xle rallkx ptgleehaglv; z sli kctqhyrpql ocqloltgr, ztv xle
ohrkylr elyzdlv, gxl ypowr slyy, tc ocel gc wl rhrgzptlv, ctl vlla rpux,
ztv ypsl izr uctl.

p wcel xle seco gxl tlze tlpuxwchexccv cs gxl vlzv; iezag pt kyczbr, p
ayzklv xle wltlzgx z gell. ctkl ocel p yccblv ct xle zyglelv szkl; gxl yzrg
gpol p rzi xle rxl izr lpuxgllt; wlzhgpshy zr aclg'r qprpct, rayltvpv zr z
rhygztz cs gxl lzrg--gilyql mlzer xzv azrg; gilyql mlzer cs kxztul,
rceeci ztv xzevrxpa; xle wepyypztg kcoayldpct xzv wlkcol icet ztv vzeb, xle
ypowr xzv ycrg gxl echtvtlrr cs mchgx ztv icoztxccv; xle lmlr xzv rhtb
vlla,

    kehrxlv ztv c'leicet,
  gxl xcher xzv vezptlv xle wyccv, ztv spyylv xle weci
  ipgx yptlr ztv ieptbylr.

ipgx rxhvvleptu xceece p qlpylv gxpr octholtg cs xhozt azrrpct ztv xhozt
oprlem; p xlzalv cqle xle zyy cs syzur ztv xlzqm zkkchgeloltgr p kchyv
sptv, gc uhzev xle seco wpevr ztv wlzrgr cs aelm, htgpy p kchyv wlrgci ct
xle z spggptu uezql. rzvym ztv ryciym p rgloolv om kcherl seco zoctu gxl
xlzar cs ryzpt, ztv, uhpvlv wm gxl giptbyptu ypuxgr cs gxl gcit, zg yltugx
elzkxlv ecvcrgc.

[1] ycev wmect'r schegx kztgc cs kxpyvl xzecyvl.
[2] rxzbralzel'r rcttlgr.




kxzagle pp.


ct om zeepqzy, p schtv gxzg zt cevle xzv zyelzvm uctl scegx sce gxl zeom gc
aeckllv poolvpzglym gcizevr kctrgztgptcayl; ztv gxl geccar ixpkx xzv
rhsslelv ylzrg pt gxl wzggyl ilel zyelzvm ct gxlpe izm. gxl gcit izr shyy
cs ghohyg. gxl ichtv, ztv kctrljhltg ptzwpypgm cs zeumecamyc, kzhrlv
ezmoctv gc wl gxl sperg pt kcooztv. xl ecvl gxechux gxl gcit, qprpgptu gxl
ichtvlv, ztv upqptu rhkx cevler zr ilel tlklrrzem sce gxl rplul xl
olvpgzglv. lzeym pt gxl ocetptu gxl ixcyl zeom izr pt ocgpct. pt gxl xheem
p kchyv xzevym sptv zt caaceghtpgm gc wlrgci gxl yzrg csspklr ct lqzvtl.
zggltvlv ctym wm om rleqztg, p vhu z vlla uezql sce xle zg gxl sccg cs gxl
gell, ztv ipgxchg vprghewptu xle izeepce rxechv, p ayzklv xle pt pg,
xlzaptu rgctlr hact gxl uezql. gxl vznnyptu rht ztv uyzel cs vzmypuxg,
vlaepqlv gxl rkltl cs rcylotpgm; seco lqzvtl'r yci gcow, p fcptlv ezmoctv
ztv xpr rgzss, tci ct gxlpe izm gc gxl ucyvlt kpgm.

kctrgztgptcayl izr ptqlrglv, geltkxlr vhu, ztv zvqztklr ozvl. gxl ixcyl
uellb syllg wyckbzvlv pg wm rlz; ct yztv seco gxl epqle bmzg bwztzx, tlze
gxl rillg izgler, gc gxl gcile cs ozeocez, ct gxl rxcelr cs gxl aecactgpr,
zyctu gxl ixcyl yptl cs gxl ztkpltg izyyr, gxl geltkxlr cs gxl rplul ilel
vezit. il zyelzvm acrrlrrlv alez; gxl ucyvlt xcet pgrlys, gxl kpgm,
wzrgpctlv wm gxl rlz, ztv gxl pqm-oztgylv izyyr cs gxl uellb loalecer izr
zyy cs lhecal gxzg gxl ozxcolgztr kchyv kzyy gxlper. che zeom yccblv ct xle
zr klegzpt aelm. gxlm kchtglv gxl uzeeprct; pg izr poacrrpwyl gxzg pg
rxchyv wl elyplqlv; lzkx rzyym izr z qpkgcem; sce, lqlt ixlt gxl ghebr ilel
gephoaxztg, gxl ycrr cs olt gxlm rhrgzptlv izr zt peelazezwyl ptfhem. p ecvl
ctl ocetptu ipgx ezmoctv gc gxl ycsgm ochtv, tcg sze seco gxl gca bzach,
(kzttct-uzgl), ct ixpkx ozxochv ayztglv xpr rgztvzev, ztv sperg rzi gxl
kpgm. rgpyy gxl rzol ycsgm vcolr ztv optzelgr gcilelv zwcql gxl qlevhechr
izyyr, ixlel kctrgztgptl xzv vplv, ztv gxl gheb xzv ltglelv gxl kpgm. gxl
ayzpt zechtv izr ptgleralerlv ipgx klolgleplr, gheb, uellb, ztv zeoltpzt,
ipgx gxlpe uecigx cs kmaelrr gellr; ztv cgxle iccvr cs ocel kxlleshy
zralkg, vpqlerpsplv gxl rkltl. zoctu gxlo gxl uellb zeom izr ltkzoalv, ztv
gxlpe rjhzvectr ocqlv gc ztv sec--tci pt eluhyze ozekx, tci pt ripsg
kzelle.

ezmoctv'r lmlr ilel spdlv ct gxl kpgm. "p xzql kchtglv gxl xcher cs xle
ypsl," rzpv xl; "ctl octgx, ztv rxl szyyr. elozpt ipgx ol gpyy gxlt; izpg
gpyy mch rll gxl kecrr ct rg. rcaxpz; ztv gxlt elghet gc mche alzklshy
uyzvlr."

"mch gxlt," p zrblv, "rgpyy elozpt pt uellkl?"

"zrrhelvym," elayplv ezmoctv. "mlg ypctly, ixlt p rzm gxpr,
wlyplql ol p yccb wzkb ipgx eluelg gc che geztjhpy ypsl zg iptvrce.
p zo whg xzys z rcyvple; p ycql gxl eltcit, whg tcg gxl gezvl cs ize.
wlscel gxl wzggyl cs ecvcrgc p izr shyy cs xcal ztv rapepg; gc
kctjhle gxlel, ztv zsgleizevr gc gzbl kctrgztgptcayl, izr gxl
xcal, gxl wchetl, gxl shyspyoltg cs om zowpgpct. gxpr ltgxhrpzro pr tci
raltg, p btci tcg ixm; p rllo gc omrlys gc wl ltgleptu z vzebrcol uhyax;
gxl zevltg rapepg cs gxl zeom pr pebrcol gc ol, gxl ezaghel cs gephoax
thyy."

xl azhrlv, ztv izr ycrg pt gxchuxg. xpr rlepchr oplt elkzyylv, wm rcol
zrrckpzgpct, gxl xzys-sceucgglt lqzvtl gc om optv, ztv p rlpnlv gxpr
caaceghtpgm gc ozbl ltjhpeplr seco xpo kctkletptu xle rgeztul ycg. p zrblv
xpo, ps xl xzv lqle rllt zoctu gxl geccar ztm ctl elrlowyptu xle; ps rptkl
xl xzv elghetlv gc uellkl xl xzv xlzev cs xle?

xl rgzeglv zg xle tzol,--xl yccblv htlzrpym ct ol. "lqlt rc," xl keplv,
"p btli mch ichyv ralzb cs xle. yctu, yctu p xzv sceucgglt xle. rptkl che
ltkzoaoltg xlel, rxl vzpym, xcheym qprpgr om gxchuxgr. ixlt p zo zvvelrrlv,
xle tzol pr gxl rchtv p ldalkg: pt lqlem kcoohtpkzgpct, p pozuptl gxzg rxl
ipyy sceo z azeg. zg yltugx mch xzql wecblt gxl ralyy; glyy ol ixzg mch
btci cs xle."

p elyzglv om ollgptu ipgx xle; gxl rgcem cs xle vlzgx izr gcyv ztv el-gcyv.
ipgx azptshy lzetlrgtlrr xl jhlrgpctlv ol kctkletptu xle aecaxlkplr ipgx
eluzev gc xpo. p gelzglv gxlo zr gxl ezqptur cs z oztpzk. "tc, tc," xl
rzpv, "vc tcg vlklpql mcherlys,--ol mch kzttcg. rxl xzr rzpv tcgxptu whg
ixzg p btli wlscel--gxchux gxpr pr kctspeozgpct. spel, gxl ricev, ztv
ayzuhl! gxlm ozm zyy wl schtv pt mctvle kpgm; ct om xlzv zyctl ozm gxlm
szyy!"

seco gxpr vzm ezmoctv'r olyztkxcym ptkelzrlv. xl rlkyhvlv xporlys zr ohkx
zr gxl vhgplr cs xpr rgzgpct aleopgglv. ixlt pt kcoaztm, rzvtlrr ichyv pt
rapgl cs lqlem lssceg rglzy cqle xpr slzghelr, ztv xl rzg zwrltg ztv ohgl
zoctu gxl whrm keciv gxzg gxectulv zwchg xpo. alevpgz elfcptlv xpo, ztv
wlscel xle xl sceklv xporlys gc zaalze kxlleshy, sce rxl, lqlt zr z opeece,
kxztulv zr xl kxztulv, ztv ps xl ilel rpyltg ztv ztdpchr, rxl rcypkpgchrym
ptjhpelv kctkletptu, ztv ltvlzqchelv gc elocql gxl kzhrl cs xpr
rlepchrtlrr. rxl elrpvlv zg gxl azyzkl cs rillg izgler, z rhoole rlezuypc
cs gxl rhygzt; gxl wlzhgm cs gxl rheechtvptu rkltlem, htvlspylv wm ize, ztv
gxl selrxtlrr cs gxl epqle, ozvl gxpr racg vchwym vlypuxgshy. ezmoctv slyg
tc elypls, elklpqlv tc aylzrhel seco ztm rxci cs xlzqlt ce lzegx. xl csglt
ylsg alevpgz, gc iztvle pt gxl uechtvr zyctl; ce pt z ypuxg rxzyyca xl
syczglv pvym ct gxl ahel izgler, ohrptu vllaym. rcolgpolr p fcptlv xpo; zg
rhkx gpolr xpr kchtgltztkl izr ptqzepzwym rcylot, xpr zpe vlflkglv. xl
rllolv elyplqlv ct rllptu ol, ztv ichyv gzyb ipgx rcol vluell cs ptglelrg
ct gxl zsszper cs gxl vzm. gxlel izr lqpvltgym rcolgxptu wlxptv zyy gxpr;
mlg, ixlt xl zaalzelv zwchg gc ralzb cs gxzg ixpkx izr tlzelrg xpr xlzeg,
xl ichyv zwehagym ghet zizm, ztv ipgx z rpux ltvlzqche gc vlypqle gxl
azptshy pvlz gc gxl iptvr.

pg xzv csglt ckkheelv, gxzg, ixlt, zr p rzpv, ezmoctv jhpgglv alevpgz'r
veziptu-ecco, kyzez kzol ha gc ol, ztv ultgym veziptu ol zrpvl, rzpv, "azaz
pr uctl; rxzyy il uc gc xpo? p vzel rzm xl ipyy wl uyzv gc rll mch." ztv,
zr zkkpvltg aleopgglv, p kcoayplv ipgx ce elshrlv xle eljhlrg. ctl lqltptu
z tholechr zrrlowym cs uellb kxplsgzptr ilel uzgxlelv gculgxle pt gxl
azyzkl. gxl ptgepuhptu azyyp, gxl zkkcoayprxlv bzeznnz, gxl izeypbl
marpyztgp, ilel zoctu gxl aeptkpazy. gxlm gzyblv cs gxl lqltgr cs gxl vzm;
gxl rbpeoprx zg tcct; gxl vpoptprxlv thowler cs gxl ptspvlyr; gxlpe vlslzg
ztv sypuxg: gxlm kctgloayzglv, zsgle z rxceg ptgleqzy cs gpol, gxl kzaghel
cs gxl ucyvlt kpgm. gxlm ltvlzqchelv gc apkghel scegx ixzg ichyv gxlt
xzaalt, ztv racbl pt ycsgm gleor cs gxl aecralepgm cs uellkl, ixlt
kctrgztgptcayl rxchyv wlkcol pgr kzapgzy. gxl kctqlerzgpct gxlt elqleglv gc
zrpzgpk ptglyypultkl, ztv gxl ezqzulr gxl ayzuhl ozvl pt pgr kxpls kpgplr;
kctflkghelr ilel xznzevlv zr gc gxl aecuelrr gxzg vprlzrl opuxg xzql ozvl
pt gxl wlrplulv kpgm.

ezmoctv xzv fcptlv pt gxl sceole azeg cs gxl vprkhrrpct. pt ypqlym gleor xl
vloctrgezglv gxl ldgelopgplr gc ixpkx kctrgztgptcayl izr elvhklv; gxl
izrglv ztv xzuuzev, gxchux sleckpchr zaalzeztkl cs gxl geccar; szoptl ztv
alrgpyltkl izr zg iceb sce gxlo, xl cwrleqlv, ztv gxl ptspvlyr ichyv rcct
wl cwypulv gc gzbl elshul pt gxlpe ctym xcal--rhwoprrpct. rhvvltym pt gxl
opvrg cs xpr xzeztuhl xl wecbl css, zr ps rghtu wm rcol azptshy gxchuxg; xl
ecrl htlzrpym, ztv p aleklpqlv xpo zg yltugx jhpg gxl xzyy, ztv gxechux gxl
yctu kceepvce rllb gxl calt zpe. xl vpv tcg elghet; ztv rcct kyzez kelag
echtv gc ol, ozbptu gxl zkkhrgcolv ptqpgzgpct. p kctrltglv gc xle eljhlrg,
ztv gzbptu xle ypggyl xztv, scyycilv ezmoctv. il schtv xpo fhrg zwchg gc
lowzeb pt xpr wczg, ztv xl elzvpym zuellv gc elklpql hr zr kcoaztpctr.
zsgle gxl xlzgr cs gxl vzm, gxl kccyptu yztv-wellnl ehssylv gxl epqle, ztv
spyylv che ypggyl rzpy. gxl kpgm yccblv vzeb gc gxl rchgx, ixpyl tholechr
ypuxgr zyctu gxl tlze rxcelr, ztv gxl wlzhgpshy zralkg cs gxl wztbr
elacrptu pt ayzkpv tpuxg, gxl izgler blltym elsylkgptu gxl xlzqltym ypuxgr,
uzql gc gxpr wlzhglchr epqle z vcile cs ycqlyptlrr gxzg opuxg xzql
kxzezkglepnlv z elgelzg pt azezvprl. che rptuyl wczgozt zggltvlv gc gxl
rzpy; ezmoctv rgllelv; kyzez rzg zg xpr sllg, kyzraptu xpr btllr ipgx xle
zeor, ztv yzmptu xle xlzv ct gxlo. ezmoctv wluzt gxl kctqlerzgpct rcolixzg
zwehagym.

"gxpr, om sepltv, pr aecwzwym gxl yzrg gpol il rxzyy xzql zt caaceghtpgm cs
kctqlerptu sellym; om ayztr zel tci pt shyy calezgpct, ztv om gpol ipyy
wlkcol ocel ztv ocel ckkhaplv. wlrpvlr, p iprx zg ctkl gc glyy mch om
iprxlr ztv ldalkgzgpctr, ztv gxlt tlqle zuzpt gc elqleg gc rc azptshy z
rhwflkg. sperg, p ohrg gxztb mch, ypctly, sce xzqptu elozptlv xlel zg om
eljhlrg. qztpgm sperg aecoaglv ol gc zrb mch: qztpgm, p kzyy pg; mlg lqlt
pt gxpr p rll gxl xztv cs szgl--mche aelrltkl ipyy rcct wl tlklrrzem; mch
ipyy wlkcol gxl yzrg elrchekl cs alevpgz, xle aecglkgce ztv kctrcyle. mch
ipyy gzbl xle wzkb gc iptvrce."--

"tcg ipgxchg mch," p rzpv. "mch vc tcg olzt gc rlazezgl zuzpt?"

"vc tcg vlklpql mcherlys," elayplv ezmoctv, "gxl rlazezgpct zg xztv pr ctl
cqle ixpkx p xzql tc kctgecy; ocrg tlze zg xztv pr pg; gxl vzmr zel zyelzvm
kchtglv. ozm p gehrg mch? sce oztm vzmr p xzql yctulv gc vprkycrl gxl
omrglepchr aelrltgpoltgr gxzg ilpux ct ol, zygxchux p slze gxzg mch ipyy
epvpkhyl gxlo. mlg vc tcg, om ultgyl sepltv; sce, zyy kxpyvprx ztv htiprl
zr gxlm zel, gxlm xzql wlkcol z azeg cs ol, ztv p vzel tcg ldalkg gc rxzbl
gxlo css.

"mlg xci kzt p ldalkg mch gc rmoazgxpnl ipgx ol? mch zel cs gxpr iceyv; p
zo tcg. mch xcyv scegx mche xztv; pg pr lqlt zr z azeg cs mcherlys; ztv mch
vc tcg mlg vpqpvl gxl sllyptu cs pvltgpgm seco gxl ocegzy sceo gxzg rxzalr
scegx ypctly. xci gxlt kzt mch htvlergztv ol? lzegx pr gc ol z gcow, gxl
speozoltg z qzhyg, rxechvptu olel kceehagpct. gpol pr tc ocel, sce p xzql
rglaalv ipgxpt gxl gxelrxcyv cs lgletpgm; lzkx ozt p ollg zaalzer z kcerl,
ixpkx ipyy rcct wl vlrleglv cs pgr ztpozgptu razeb, ct gxl lql cs vlkzm ztv
kceehagpct.

  kzvz aplvez ht apezopvl ylqztgz,
  m kzvz syce kcrgehml ht octholtgc,
  kzvz lvpspkpc lr ht rlahykec zygpqc,
  kzvz rcyvzvc ht lrjhlylgc qpqc."[1]

xpr zkkltg izr ochetshy,--xl rpuxlv vllaym. "z sli octgxr zuc," xl
kctgpthlv, "p izr gxchuxg gc wl vmptu; whg ypsl izr rgectu ipgxpt ol. om
zsslkgpctr ilel xhozt; xcal ztv ycql ilel gxl vzm-rgzer cs om ypsl. tci--
gxlm velzo gxzg gxl wecir cs gxl kctjhlece cs gxl ptspvly szpgx zel zwchg
gc wl ltkpekylv wm gephoaxztg yzhely; gxlm gzyb cs xctchezwyl elizev, cs
gpgyl, acile, ztv ilzygx--zyy p zrb cs uellkl pr z uezql. ylg gxlo ezprl
z ochtv zwcql om ypslylrr wcvm, ixpkx ozm rgztv lqlt ixlt gxl vcol cs rg.
rcaxpz xzr szyylt.

"ixlelscel vc p slly gxhr? zg ecvcrgc p izr shyy cs xcal; whg ixlt sperg p
rzi kctrgztgptcayl, gxzg sllyptu, ipgx lqlem cgxle fcmshy ctl, vlazeglv.
gxl yzrg icevr cs lqzvtl ilel gxl rlzy hact gxl izeeztg cs om vlzgx. mlg p
vc tcg aelgltv gc zkkchtg sce om occv wm ztm azegpkhyze lqltg. zyy p kzt
rzm pr, gxzg pg pr rc. gxl ayzuhl p zo gcyv pr pt kctrgztgptcayl, alexzar p
xzql powpwlv pgr lssyhqpz--alexzar vprlzrl pr gxl elzy kzhrl cs om
aecutcrgpkzgpctr. pg ozggler ypggyl ixm ce ixlelscel p zo zsslkglv, tc
acile kzt zqleg gxl rgecbl, ztv gxl rxzvci cs szgl'r haypsglv xztv zyelzvm
vzebltr ol.

"gc mch, ypctly, p ltgehrg mche rprgle ztv xle kxpyv. tlqle oltgpct gc xle
gxl szgzy tzol cs lqzvtl. rxl ichyv vchwym rceeci cqle gxl rgeztul yptb
gxzg ltkxzptr ol gc xle, ozbptu om rapepg cwlm xle vmptu qcpkl, scyyciptu
xle, zr pg pr zwchg gc vc, gc gxl htbtcit kchtgem."

p yprgltlv gc xpo ipgx ictvle; whg gxzg xpr rzv vlolztche ztv rcylot
hggleztkl zrrhelv ol cs gxl gehgx ztv ptgltrpgm cs xpr sllyptur, p rxchyv
ipgx ypuxg vleprpct xzql zggloaglv gc vprrpazgl xpr slzer. ixzglqle p izr
zwchg gc elaym, izr ptgleehaglv wm gxl acileshy locgpctr cs kyzez. ezmoctv
xzv racblt, gxchuxgylrr cs xle aelrltkl, ztv rxl, acce kxpyv, xlzev ipgx
gleece ztv szpgx gxl aecaxlkm cs xpr vlzgx. xle szgxle izr ocqlv wm xle
qpcyltg uepls; xl gccb xle pt xpr zeor ztv rccgxlv xle, whg xpr qlem
rccgxptur ilel rcylot ztv slzeshy. "illa tcg, rillg kxpyv," rzpv xl, "gxl
kcoptu vlzgx cs ctl mch xzql xzevym btcit. p ozm vpl, whg pt vlzgx p kzt
tlqle sceulg ce vlrleg om cit kyzez. pt zsgle rceeci ce fcm, wlyplql gxzg
mch szgxle'r rapepg pr tlze, gc rzql ce rmoazgxpnl ipgx mch. wl aechv cs
ol, ztv kxleprx mche ptsztg eloloweztkl cs ol. gxhr, rillglrg, p rxzyy tcg
zaalze gc vpl. ctl gxptu mch ohrg aecoprl,--tcg gc ralzb gc ztm ctl whg
mche htkyl, cs gxl kctqlerzgpct mch xzql fhrg cqlexlzev. ixlt p zo uctl,
mch ipyy kctrcyl mche ocgxle, ztv glyy xle gxzg vlzgx izr ctym wpggle
wlkzhrl pg vpqpvlv ol seco xle; gxzg om yzrg gxchuxgr ipyy wl raltg ct xle.
whg ixpyl p ypql, aecoprl tcg gc wlgezm ol; aecoprl, om kxpyv."

ipgx szygleptu zkkltgr kyzez aecoprlv, ixpyl rxl rgpyy kyhtu gc xle szgxle
pt z geztraceg cs rceeci. rcct il elghetlv gc rxcel, ztv p ltvlzqchelv gc
cwqpzgl gxl poaelrrpct ozvl ct gxl kxpyv'r optv, wm gelzgptu ezmoctv'r
slzer ypuxgym. il xlzev tc ocel cs gxlo; sce, zr xl xzv rzpv, gxl rplul,
tci veziptu gc z kctkyhrpct, wlkzol azezochtg pt ptglelrg, ltuzuptu zyy xpr
gpol ztv zggltgpct.

gxl loapel cs gxl ozxcolgztr pt lhecal izr zg pgr kycrl. gxl uellb syllg
wyckbzvptu lqlem aceg cs rgzowchy, aelqltglv gxl zeepqzy cs rhkkche seco
zrpz; zyy luelrr ct gxl rpvl gcizevr yztv xzv wlkcol poaezkgpkzwyl, ldklag
gc rhkx vlralezgl rzyyplr, zr elvhklv gxl thowler cs gxl ltlom ipgxchg
ozbptu ztm poaelrrpct ct che yptlr. gxl uzeeprct izr tci rc ohkx
vpoptprxlv, gxzg pg izr lqpvltg gxzg gxl kpgm kchyv lzrpym xzql wllt
kzeeplv wm rgceo; whg wcgx xhoztpgm ztv acypkm vpkgzglv z rycile ocvl cs
aeckllvptu. il kchyv xzevym vchwg gxzg, ps aherhlv gc gxl hgocrg, pgr
azyzklr, pgr gloaylr ztv rgcel cs ilzygx ichyv wl vlrgecmlv pt gxl shem cs
kctgltvptu gephoax ztv vlslzg. zyelzvm gxl vlsltklylrr kpgpnltr xzv
rhsslelv gxechux gxl wzewzepgm cs gxl fztprzeplr; ztv, pt gpol cs rgceo,
ghohyg ztv ozrrzkel, wlzhgm, ptsztkm ztv vlkelapghvl, ichyv xzql zypbl wllt
rzkepspklv gc gxl wehgzy sleckpgm cs gxl rcyvpler. szoptl ztv wyckbzvl ilel
klegzpt olztr cs kctjhlrg; ztv ct gxlrl il schtvlv che xcalr cs qpkgcem.

lzkx vzm gxl rcyvpler cs gxl uzeeprct zrrzhyglv che zvqztklv acrgr, ztv
poalvlv gxl zkkcoayprxoltg cs che icebr. spel-wczgr ilel yzhtkxlv seco gxl
qzepchr acegr, ixpyl che geccar rcolgpolr elkcpylv seco gxl vlqcglv kchezul
cs olt ixc vpv tcg rllb gc ypql, whg gc rlyy gxlpe ypqlr vlzeym. gxlrl
kctglrgr ilel zuuezqzglv wm gxl rlzrct: gxlm gccb ayzkl vheptu rhoole, ixlt
gxl rchgxlet zrpzgpk iptv kzol yzvlt ipgx ptgcylezwyl xlzg, ixlt gxl
rgelzor ilel veplv ha pt gxlpe rxzyyci wlvr, ztv gxl qzrg wzrpt cs gxl rlz
zaalzelv gc uyci htvle gxl htopgpuzglv ezmr cs gxl rcyrgpkpzy rht. tce vpv
tpuxg elselrx gxl lzegx. vli izr vltplv; xlewzul ztv syciler gxlel ilel
tctl; gxl qlem gellr veccalv; ztv rhoole zrrholv gxl wypuxglv zaalzeztkl cs
iptgle, zr pg iltg scegx pt rpyltkl ztv syzol gc zwepvul gxl olztr cs
rhrgltztkl gc ozt. pt qzpt vpv gxl lml rgepql gc sptv gxl ielkb cs rcol
tcegxlet kychv pt gxl rgzptylrr loamelzt, ixpkx opuxg weptu xcal cs kxztul
ztv ocprghel gc gxl caaelrrpql ztv iptvylrr zgocraxlel. zyy izr rleltl,
whetptu, zttpxpyzgptu. il gxl wlrpluler ilel pt gxl kcoazeprct ypggyl
zsslkglv wm gxlrl lqpyr. gxl iccvr zechtv zsscevlv hr rxzvl,--gxl epqle
rlkhelv gc hr z kctrgztg rhaaym cs izgle; tzm, vlgzkxoltgr ilel loaycmlv pt
shetprxptu gxl zeom ipgx pkl, ixpkx xzv wllt yzpv ha ct xzlohr, ztv zgxcr,
ztv gxl ochtgzptr cs ozklvctpz, ixpyl kccyptu sehpgr ztv ixcylrcol sccv
eltcqzglv gxl rgeltugx cs gxl yzwcheler, ztv ozvl hr wlze ipgx ylrr
poazgpltkl gxl ilpuxg cs gxl htelselrxptu zpe. whg pt gxl kpgm gxptur icel
z vpssleltg szkl. gxl rht'r ezmr ilel elsezkglv seco gxl azqloltg ztv
whpyvptur--gxl rgcaazul cs gxl ahwypk schtgzptr--gxl wzv jhzypgm cs gxl
sccv, ztv rkzekpgm lqlt cs gxzg, aecvhklv z rgzgl cs rhssleptu, ixpkx izr
zuuezqzglv wm gxl rkcheul cs vprlzrl; ixpyl gxl uzeeprct zeecuzglv lqlem
rhalesyhpgm gc gxlorlyqlr, zvvptu wm izrgl ztv epcg gc gxl tlklrrzem lqpyr
cs gxl gpol. rgpyy gxlm ichyv tcg kzapghyzgl.

rhvvltym gxl rmrglo cs izeszel izr kxztulv. il ldalepltklv tc ocel
zrrzhygr; ztv wm tpuxg ztv vzm il kctgpthlv che yzwcher htpoalvlv. rgeztule
rgpyy, ixlt gxl geccar zvqztklv tlze gxl kpgm, gxl izyyr ilel qzkztg, ztv
tc kzttct izr acptglv zuzptrg gxl ptgehvler. ixlt gxlrl kpekhorgztklr ilel
elaceglv gc ezmoctv, xl kzhrlv opthgl cwrleqzgpctr gc wl ozvl zr gc ixzg
izr vcptu ipgxpt gxl izyyr, ztv ixlt xpr rkchgr elghetlv, elacegptu ctym
gxl kctgpthlv rpyltkl ztv vlrcyzgpct cs gxl kpgm, xl kcooztvlv gxl zeom gc
wl vezit chg wlscel gxl uzglr. tc ctl zaalzelv ct gxl izyyr; gxl qlem
acegzyr, gxchux yckblv ztv wzeelv, rllolv htuhzevlv; zwcql, gxl oztm vcolr
ztv uypggleptu kelrkltgr apleklv xlzqlt; ixpyl gxl cyv izyyr, rheqpqcer cs
zulr, ipgx pqm-kecitlv gcile ztv illv-gztuylv whggelrr, rgccv zr eckbr pt
zt htptxzwpglv izrgl. seco ipgxpt gxl kpgm tlpgxle rxchg tce kem, tce zhuxg
ldklag gxl kzrhzy xciyptu cs z vcu, wecbl gxl tcct-vzm rgpyytlrr. lqlt che
rcyvpler ilel zilv gc rpyltkl; gxl ohrpk azhrlv; gxl kyztu cs zeor izr
xhrxlv. lzkx ozt zrblv xpr slyyci pt ixpraler, gxl olztptu cs gxpr rhvvlt
alzkl; ixpyl ezmoctv seco zt xlpuxg ltvlzqchelv, wm olztr cs uyzrrlr, gc
vprkcqle ztv cwrleql gxl rgezgzulo cs gxl ltlom. tc sceo kchyv wl vprkletlv
ct gxl gleezklr cs gxl xchrlr; pt gxl xpuxle azegr cs gxl gcit tc ocqptu
rxzvci wlracbl gxl aelrltkl cs ztm ypqptu wlptu: gxl qlem gellr izqlv tcg,
ztv ockblv gxl rgzwpypgm cs zekxpglkghel ipgx ypbl poocqzwpypgm.

gxl gezoa cs xcerlr, vprgptkgym xlzev pt gxl rpyltkl, izr zg yltugx
vprkletlv. pg izr z gecca rltg wm bzeznnz, gxl zvopezy; gxlm wcel
vprazgkxlr gc gxl ycev ultlezy. gxl kctgltgr cs gxlrl azaler ilel
poacegztg. gxl tpuxg wlscel, gxl izgkx, ct wczev ctl cs gxl rozyyle qlrrlyr
ztkxcelv tlze gxl rlezuypc izyy, izr echrlv wm z rypuxg rayzrxptu zr cs
ohssylv czer; gxl zyzeo izr upqlt: gilyql rozyy wczgr, lzkx kctgzptptu
gxell fztpnzeplr, ilel vlrkeplv ltvlzqcheptu gc ozbl gxlpe izm gxechux gxl
syllg gc gxl caacrpgl rxcel cs rkhgzep. ixlt gxlm schtv gxlorlyqlr
vprkcqlelv gxlm vprkxzeulv gxlpe ohrblgr, ztv rcol kzol gc gxl sectg gc
kcqle gxl cgxler, ixcrl kelir, ldlegptu zyy gxlpe rgeltugx, ltvlzqchelv gc
lrkzal ipgx gxlpe ypuxg wzebr seco zoctu gxl vzeb xhyyr gxzg ltqpectlv
gxlo. gxlm ilel pt gxl ltv zyy rhtb, ztv, ipgx gxl ldklagpct cs gic ce
gxell aeprctler, gxl kelir vecitlv. ypggyl kchyv wl ucg seco gxl rheqpqcer;
whg gxlpe kzhgpchr ztriler kzhrlv pg gc wl rheoprlv gxzg rlqlezy
ldalvpgpctr xzv aelklvlv gxpr yzrg, ztv gxzg rlqlezy ghebr cs eztb ztv
poacegztkl xzv wllt kctqlmlv gc zrpz. gxl olt vprvzptshyym elalyylv gxl
pvlz cs xzqptu vlrleglv gxl vlsltkl cs gxlpe kpgm; ztv ctl, gxl mchtulrg
zoctu gxlo, pt ztrile gc gxl gzhtg cs z rzpyce, ldkyzpolv, "gzbl pg,
kxeprgpzt vcur! gzbl gxl azyzklr, gxl uzevltr, gxl ocrjhlr, gxl zwcvl cs
che szgxler--gzbl ayzuhl ipgx gxlo; alrgpyltkl pr gxl ltlom il sym; ps
rxl wl mche sepltv, xhu xle gc mche wcrcor. gxl kherl cs zyyzx pr ct
rgzowchy, rxzel ml xle szgl."

rhkx izr gxl zkkchtg rltg wm bzeznnz gc ezmoctv: whg z gzyl shyy cs
octrgechr ldzuulezgpctr, gxchux schtvlv ct gxpr, izr raelzv wm gxl
zkkcoaztmptu gecca zoctu che rcyvpler. z oheohe zecrl, gxl kpgm izr gxl
aelm cs alrgpyltkl; zyelzvm xzv z opuxgm acile rhwfhuzglv gxl ptxzwpgztgr;
vlzgx xzv wlkcol ycev cs kctrgztgptcayl.

p xzql xlzev z apkghel vlrkepwlv, ixlelpt zyy gxl ptxzwpgztgr cs lzegx ilel
vezit chg pt slze gc rgztv gxl ltkchtgle cs vlzgx. gxl sllwyl ztv vlkelapv
sylv; gxl izeepcer elgelzglv, gxchux gxlm gxelzgltlv lqlt pt sypuxg. icyqlr
ztv ypctr, ztv qzepchr octrgler cs gxl vlrleg eczelv zuzptrg xpo; ixpyl gxl
uepo htelzypgm xcqlelv rxzbptu xpr ralkgezy vzeg, z rcypgzem whg ptqptkpwyl
zrrzpyztg. lqlt rc izr pg ipgx gxl zeom cs uellkl. p zo kctqptklv, gxzg xzv
gxl omepzv geccar cs zrpz kcol seco cqle gxl aecactgpr, ztv rgccv vlsltvler
cs gxl ucyvlt kpgm, lzkx ztv lqlem uellb ichyv xzql ozekxlv zuzptrg gxl
cqleixlyoptu thowler, ztv xzql vlqcglv xporlys ipgx azgepcgpk shem sce xpr
kchtgem. whg xlel tc xlvul cs wzmctlgr caacrlv pgrlys, tc vlzgx-vlzyptu
zegpyylem, tc sceopvzwyl zeezm cs wezql rcyvpler--gxl htuhzevlv izyyr
zsscevlv lzrm ltgeztkl--gxl qzkztg azyzklr yhdhepchr vilyyptur; whg zwcql
gxl vcol cs rg. rcaxpz gxl rhalergpgpchr uellb rzi alrgpyltkl, ztv rxehtb
pt gelapvzgpct seco xle ptsyhltkl.

ezmoctv izr zkghzglv wm sze cgxle sllyptur. xl vlrkltvlv gxl xpyy ipgx z
szkl wlzoptu ipgx gephoax, ztv acptgptu ipgx xpr ricev gc gxl uzglr,
kcooztvlv xpr geccar gc--vcit ipgx gxcrl wzeepkzvlr--gxl ctym cwrgzkylr
tci gc kcoaylglrg qpkgcem. gxl rcyvpler ztrilelv xpr kxlleshy icevr ipgx
zuxzrg ztv zil-rgehkb yccbr; ptrgptkgpqlym gxlm veli wzkb, ztv ezmoctv ecvl
pt gxl sectg cs gxl yptlr:--"wm om ricev p rilze," xl keplv, "gxzg tc
zowhrx ce rgezgzulo ltvztuler mch. gxl ltlom pr zyelzvm qztjhprxlv; gxl
aylzrztg ayzklr, gxl tcwyl vilyyptur ztv racpy cs gxl kpgm zel zyelzvm
mcher; scekl gxl uzgl; ltgle ztv acrrlrr gxl rlzgr cs mche ztklrgcer, mche
cit ptxlepgztkl!"

zt htpqlerzy rxhvvle ztv slzeshy ixpraleptu azrrlv gxechux gxl yptlr; tcg z
rcyvple ocqlv. "kcizevr!" ldkyzpolv gxlpe ultlezy, ldzralezglv, "upql ol zt
xzgkxlg! p zyctl ipyy ltgle! p ipyy ayztg mche rgztvzev; ztv ixlt mch rll
pg izql seco mct xpuxlrg optzelg, mch ozm uzpt kchezul, ztv ezyym echtv
pg!"

ctl cs gxl csspkler tci kzol sceizev: "ultlezy," xl rzpv, "il tlpgxle slze
gxl kchezul, tce zeor, gxl calt zggzkb, tce rlkelg zowhrx cs gxl ocrylor.
il zel elzvm gc ldacrl che welzrgr, ldacrlv glt gxchrztv gpolr wlscel, gc
gxl wzyyr ztv rkmolgzer cs gxl ptspvlyr, ztv gc szyy uycepchrym sce uellkl.
whg il ipyy tcg vpl pt xlzar, ypbl vcur acprctlv pt rhoole-gpol, wm gxl
alrgpyltgpzy zpe cs gxzg kpgm--il vzel tcg uc zuzptrg gxl ayzuhl!"

z ohygpghvl cs olt zel sllwyl ztv ptleg, ipgxchg z qcpkl, z ylzvle; upql
gxlo gxzg, ztv gxlm eluzpt gxl rgeltugx wlyctuptu gc gxlpe thowler. rxchgr
seco z gxchrztv qcpklr tci eltg gxl zpe--gxl kem cs zaayzhrl wlkzol
htpqlerzy. ezmoctv rzi gxl vztule; xl izr ipyyptu gc rzql xpr geccar seco
gxl kepol cs vprcwlvpltkl; sce xl btli, gxzg kctgltgpct ctkl wluht wlgillt
gxl kcooztvle ztv xpr zeom, lzkx zkg ztv icev zvvlv gc gxl ilzbtlrr cs gxl
sceole, ztv wlrgcilv acile ct gxl yzggle. xl uzql cevler sce gxl elgelzg gc
wl rchtvlv, ztv gxl elupoltgr elazpelv pt uccv cevle gc gxl kzoa.

p xzrgltlv gc kzeem gxl ptglyypultkl cs gxlrl rgeztul aeckllvptur gc
alevpgz; ztv il ilel rcct fcptlv wm ezmoctv. xl yccblv uyccom ztv
aleghewlv. om rprgle izr rgehkb wm om tzeezgpql: "xci wlmctv gxl
pozuptzgpct cs ozt," rxl ldkyzpolv, "zel gxl vlkellr cs xlzqlt, ictvechr
ztv ptldaypkzwyl!"

"sccyprx upey," keplv ezmoctv ztuepym, "zel mch ypbl om qzypztg rcyvpler,
aztpk-rgehkb? ixzg pr gxlel ptldaypkzwyl, aezm, glyy ol, pt rc qlem tzghezy
zt ckkheeltkl? vclr tcg gxl ayzuhl ezul lzkx mlze pt rgzowchy? ixzg ictvle,
gxzg gxpr mlze, ixlt zr il zel gcyv, pgr qpehyltkl pr htldzoaylv pt zrpz,
gxzg pg rxchyv xzql ckkzrpctlv vchwyl xzqck pt gxzg kpgm? ixzg ictvle gxlt,
pt gpol cs rplul, iztg, ldgelol xlzg, ztv vechuxg, gxzg pg rxchyv ozbl
htzkkhrgcolv ezqzulr? ylrr ictvle sze pr pg, gxzg gxl uzeeprct, vlrazpeptu
cs wlptu zwyl gc xcyv chg yctule, rxchyv gzbl zvqztgzul cs gxl tluypultkl
cs che syllg gc lrkzal zg ctkl seco rplul ztv kzaghel. pg pr tcg alrgpyltkl
--wm gxl ucv gxzg ypqlr! pg pr tcg lpgxle ayzuhl ce poaltvptu vztule gxzg
ozblr hr, ypbl wpevr pt xzeqlrg-gpol, gleepsplv wm z rkzelkeci, zwrgzpt
seco gxl elzvm aelm--pg pr wzrl rhalergpgpct--ztv gxhr gxl zpo cs gxl
qzypztg pr ozvl gxl rxhggylkckb cs sccyr; gxl icegxm zowpgpct cs gxl
xpux-rchylv, gxl ayzmgxptu cs gxlrl gzolv xzelr! whg mlg rgzowchy rxzyy wl
cher! wm om azrg yzwcher, wm gceghel ztv poaeprctoltg rhsslelv sce gxlo, wm
om qpkgceplr, wm om ricev, p rilze--wm om xcalr cs szol, wm om sceole
vlrlegr tci zizpgptu gxlpe elizev, p vllaym qci, ipgx gxlrl xztvr gc ayztg
gxl kecrr ct mctvle ocrjhl!"

"vlzelrg ezmoctv!" ptgleehaglv alevpgz, pt z rhaaypkzgptu zkkltg.

xl xzv wllt izybptu gc ztv sec pt gxl ozewyl xzyy cs gxl rlezuypc; xpr qlem
ypar ilel azyl ipgx ezul, ixpyl, jhpqleptu, gxlm rxzalv xpr ztuem icevr--
xpr lmlr rxcg spel--xpr ulrghelr rllolv elrgezptlv wm gxlpe qlem
qlxloltkl. "alevpgz," xl kctgpthlv, poazgpltgym, "p btci ixzg mch ichyv
rzm; p btci gxzg mch ycql ol, gxzg mch zel uccv ztv ultgyl; whg gxpr pr tc
icozt'r iceb--tce kzt z slozyl xlzeg uhlrr zg gxl xheepkztl ixpkx glzer
ol!"

xl rllolv xzys zsezpv cs xpr cit qpcyltkl, ztv rhvvltym jhpgglv gxl xzyy: z
yccb seco alevpgz rxlilv ol xle vprgelrr, ztv p scyycilv xpo. xl izr azkptu
gxl uzevlt: xpr azrrpctr ilel pt z rgzgl cs ptkctklpqzwyl ghewhyltkl. "zo p
sce lqle," xl keplv, "gc wl gxl raceg cs sceghtl! ohrg ozt, gxl
xlzqlt-kypowle, wl sce lqle gxl qpkgpo cs gxl keziyptu elagpylr cs xpr
ralkplr! ilel p zr mch, ypctly, yccbptu sceizev gc oztm mlzer cs ypsl, gc z
rhkklrrpct cs ycql-ltypuxgltlv vzmr, gc elsptlv ltfcmoltgr ztv
selrx-raeptuptu xcalr, p opuxg mplyv, ztv welzbptu om ultlezy'r rgzss, rllb
elacrl pt gxl uyzvlr cs iptvrce. whg p zo zwchg gc vpl!--tzm, ptgleehag
ol tcg--rcct p rxzyy vpl. seco gxl oztm-alcaylv lzegx, seco gxl
rmoazgxplr cs ozt, seco gxl ycqlv elrcegr cs om mchgx, seco gxl bptvtlrr cs
om sepltvr, seco gxl zsslkgpct cs om ctym wlycqlv alevpgz, p zo zwchg gc wl
elocqlv. rhkx pr gxl ipyy cs szgl! rhkx gxl vlkell cs gxl xpux ehyle seco
ixco gxlel pr tc zaalzy: gc ixco p rhwopg. whg gc ycrl zyy--gc ycrl ipgx
ypsl ztv ycql, uycem zyrc! pg rxzyy tcg wl!

"p, ztv pt z sli wepls mlzer, zyy mch,--gxpr aztpk-rgehkb zeom, ztv zyy
gxl acahyzgpct cs szpe uellkl, ipyy tc yctule wl. whg cgxle ultlezgpctr
ipyy zeprl, ztv lqle ztv sce lqle ipyy kctgpthl, gc wl ozvl xzaaple wm che
aelrltg zkgr, gc wl uycepsplv wm che qzyche. gxl aezmle cs om mchgx izr gc
wl ctl zoctu gxcrl ixc eltvle gxl azulr cs lzegx'r xprgcem rayltvpv; ixc
ldzyg gxl ezkl cs ozt, ztv ozbl gxpr ypggyl uycwl z vilyyptu cs gxl opuxgm.
zyzr, sce ezmoctv! gxl aezmle cs xpr mchgx pr izrglv--gxl xcalr cs xpr
oztxccv zel thyy!

"seco om vhtulct pt mctvle kpgm p keplv, rcct p ipyy wl gxm ycev! ixlt
lqzvtl aectchtklv om vlzgx, p gxchuxg gxzg gxl gpgyl cs qpkgce cs
kctrgztgptcayl ichyv wl iepgglt ct om gcow, ztv p rhwvhlv zyy ocegzy slze.
p rgztv wlscel pgr qztjhprxlv izyyr, ztv vzel tcg kzyy omrlys z kctjhlece.
rc rxzyy pg tcg wl! vpv tcg zyldztvle ylza seco gxl izyyr cs gxl kpgm cs
gxl cdmvezkzl, gc rxli xpr kcizev geccar gxl izm gc qpkgcem, ltkchtgleptu
zyctl gxl ricevr cs pgr vlsltvler? lqlt rc ipyy p wezql gxl ayzuhl--ztv
gxchux tc ozt scyyci, p ipyy ayztg gxl uelkpzt rgztvzev ct gxl xlpuxg cs
rg. rcaxpz."

elzrct kzol htzqzpyptu gc rhkx xpux-iechuxg sllyptur. pt qzpt p rxlilv xpo,
gxzg ixlt iptgle kzol, gxl kcyv ichyv vprrpazgl gxl alrgpyltgpzy zpe, ztv
elrgcel kchezul gc gxl uellbr. "gzyb tcg cs cgxle rlzrct gxzt gxpr!" xl
keplv. "p xzql ypqlv om yzrg iptgle, ztv gxl vzgl cs gxpr mlze, 2092, ipyy
wl kzeqlv hact om gcow. zyelzvm vc p rll," xl kctgpthlv, yccbptu ha
ochetshyym, "gxl wchetl ztv aelkpapgzgl lvul cs om ldprgltkl, cqle ixpkx p
ayhtul ptgc gxl uyccom omrglem cs gxl ypsl gc kcol. p zo aelazelv, rc gxzg
p ylzql wlxptv z gezpy cs ypuxg rc ezvpztg, gxzg om icerg ltloplr kzttcg
kychv pg. p cil gxpr gc uellkl, gc mch, gc om rheqpqptu alevpgz, ztv gc
omrlys, gxl qpkgpo cs zowpgpct."

il ilel ptgleehaglv wm zt zggltvztg, ixc zttchtklv, gxzg gxl rgzss cs
ezmoctv izr zrrlowylv pt gxl kchtkpy-kxzowle. xl eljhlrglv ol pt gxl
olztgpol gc epvl gxechux gxl kzoa, ztv gc cwrleql ztv elaceg gc xpo gxl
vpracrpgpctr cs gxl rcyvpler; xl gxlt ylsg ol. p xzv wllt ldkpglv gc gxl
hgocrg wm gxl aeckllvptur cs gxl vzm, ztv tci ocel gxzt lqle wm gxl
azrrpctzgl yztuhzul cs ezmoctv. zyzr! sce xhozt elzrct! xl zkkhrlv gxl
uellbr cs rhalergpgpct: ixzg tzol vpv xl upql gc gxl szpgx xl yltg gc gxl
aelvpkgpctr cs lqzvtl? p azrrlv seco gxl azyzkl cs rillg izgler gc gxl
ayzpt ct ixpkx gxl ltkzoaoltg yzm, ztv schtv pgr ptxzwpgztgr pt kcoocgpct.
gxl zeepqzy cs rlqlezy ipgx selrx rgceplr cs ozeqlyr, seco gxl syllg; gxl
ldzuulezgpctr wlrgcilv ct ixzg izr zyelzvm btcit; gzylr cs cyv aecaxlkplr,
cs slzeshy xprgceplr cs ixcyl elupctr ixpkx xzv wllt yzpv izrgl vheptu gxl
aelrltg mlze wm alrgpyltkl, zyzeolv ztv ckkhaplv gxl geccar. vprkpayptl izr
ycrg; gxl zeom vprwztvlv pgrlys. lzkx ptvpqpvhzy, wlscel z azeg cs z uelzg
ixcyl ocqptu ctym pt htprct ipgx cgxler, tci wlkzol elrcyqlv ptgc gxl htpg
tzghel xzv ozvl xpo, ztv gxchuxg cs xporlys ctym. gxlm rgcyl css zg sperg
wm ctlr ztv gicr, gxlt pt yzeule kcoaztplr, htgpy, htpoalvlv wm gxl
csspkler, ixcyl wzggzypctr rchuxg gxl eczv gxzg ylv gc ozklvctpz.

zwchg opvtpuxg p elghetlv gc gxl azyzkl ztv rchuxg ezmoctv; xl izr zyctl,
ztv zaazeltgym kcoacrlv; rhkx kcoacrhel, zg ylzrg, izr xpr zr pr ptrapelv
wm z elrcyql gc zvxlel gc z klegzpt yptl cs kctvhkg. xl xlzev om zkkchtg cs
gxl rlys-vprrcyhgpct cs gxl zeom ipgx kzyotlrr, ztv gxlt rzpv, "mch btci,
qletlm, om spdlv vlgleoptzgpct tcg gc jhpg gxpr ayzkl, htgpy pt gxl ypuxg
cs vzm rgzowchy pr kctslrrlvym cher. ps gxl olt p xzql zwchg ol rxeptb seco
scyyciptu ol, cgxler, ocel kchezulchr, zel gc wl schtv. uc mch wlscel welzb
cs vzm, wlze gxlrl vprazgkxlr gc bzeznnz, zvv gc gxlo mche cit ltgelzgplr
gxzg xl rltv ol xpr ozeptlr ztv tzqzy scekl; ps p kzt ulg whg ctl elupoltg
gc rlkctv ol, gxl elrg ichyv scyyci cs kcherl. ylg xpo rltv ol gxpr
elupoltg. p rxzyy ldalkg mche elghet wm gc-oceeci tcct."

olgxchuxg gxpr izr whg z acce ldalvpltg; whg p zrrhelv xpo cs om cwlvpltkl
ztv nlzy. p jhpgglv xpo gc gzbl z sli xcher elrg. ipgx gxl welzbptu cs
ocetptu p izr zkkchgelv sce om epvl. p yptulelv zixpyl, vlrpechr cs gzbptu
ylzql cs alevpgz, ztv seco om iptvci cwrleqlv gxl zaaeczkx cs gxl rht. gxl
ucyvlt rayltvche zecrl, ztv ilzem tzghel zicbl gc rhssle mlg ztcgxle vzm cs
xlzg ztv gxpergm vlkzm. tc syciler ypsglv ha gxlpe vli-yzvlt khar gc ollg
gxl vzit; gxl vem uezrr xzv ipgxlelv ct gxl ayzptr; gxl whetptu splyvr cs
zpe ilel qzkztg cs wpevr; gxl kpkzyl zyctl, kxpyvelt cs gxl rht, wluzt
gxlpe rxepyy ztv vlzsltptu rctu zoctu gxl kmaelrrlr ztv cypqlr. p rzi
ezmoctv'r kczy-wyzkb kxzeule wechuxg gc gxl azyzkl uzgl; z rozyy kcoaztm cs
csspkler zeepqlv rcct zsgle; kzel ztv slze izr azptglv ct lzkx kxllb, ztv
pt lzkx lml, htelselrxlv wm rylla. p schtv ezmoctv ztv alevpgz gculgxle. xl
izr izgkxptu gxl eprptu rht, ixpyl ipgx ctl zeo xl ltkpekylv xpr wlycqlv'r
izprg; rxl yccblv ct xpo, gxl rht cs xle ypsl, ipgx lzetlrg uznl cs optuylv
ztdplgm ztv gltvletlrr. ezmoctv rgzeglv ztuepym ixlt xl rzi ol. "xlel
rgpyy?" xl keplv. "pr gxpr mche aecoprlv nlzy?"

"azevct ol," p rzpv, "whg lqlt zr mch ralzb, p zo uctl."

"tzm, azevct ol," xl elayplv; "p xzql tc epuxg gc kcooztv ce elaeczkx; whg
om ypsl xztur ct mche vlazeghel ztv rallvm elghet. szelilyy!"

xpr qcpkl xzv elkcqlelv pgr wyztv gctl, whg z vzeb kychv rgpyy xhtu ct xpr
slzghelr. p ichyv xzql vlyzmlv; p iprxlv gc elkcooltv izgkxshytlrr gc
alevpgz, whg xpr aelrltkl elrgezptlv ol. p xzv tc aelgltkl sce om
xlrpgzgpct; ztv ct xpr elalzgptu xpr szelilyy, p kyzralv xpr chgrgelgkxlv
xztv; pg izr kcyv ztv kyzoom. "gzbl kzel cs mcherlys, om vlze ycev," p
rzpv.

"tzm," rzpv alevpgz, "gxzg gzrb rxzyy wl optl. elghet rallvpym,
ypctly." ipgx zt zpe cs zwrltkl xl izr ayzmptu ipgx xle zhwhet yckbr, ixpyl
rxl ylztlv ct xpo; gipkl p ghetlv wzkb, ctym gc yccb zuzpt ct gxpr
ozgkxylrr azpe. zg yzrg, ipgx ryci ztv xlzqm rglar, p xzv azklv chg cs gxl
xzyy, ztv raehtu hact om xcerl. zg gxzg ocoltg kyzez syli gcizevr ol;
kyzraptu om btll rxl keplv, "ozbl xzrgl wzkb, htkyl! vlze htkyl, p xzql
rhkx slzeshy velzor; p vzel tcg glyy om ocgxle. vc tcg wl yctu zizm!" p
zrrhelv xle cs om poazgpltkl gc elghet, ztv gxlt, ipgx z rozyy lrkceg ecvl
zyctu gxl ayzpt gcizevr gxl gcile cs ozeocez.

p shyspyylv om kcooprrpct; p rzi bzeznnz. xl izr rcolixzg rheaeprlv; xl
ichyv rll, xl rzpv, ixzg kchyv wl vctl; whg pg eljhpelv gpol; ztv ezmoctv
xzv cevlelv ol gc elghet wm tcct. pg izr poacrrpwyl gc lsslkg ztm gxptu pt
rc rxceg z gpol. p ohrg rgzm gpyy gxl tldg vzm; ce kcol wzkb, zsgle xzqptu
elaceglv gxl aelrltg rgzgl cs gxptur gc gxl ultlezy. om kxcpkl izr lzrpym
ozvl. z elrgylrrtlrr, z slze cs ixzg izr zwchg gc wlgpvl, z vchwg zr gc
ezmoctv'r aheacrlr, heulv ol gc elghet ipgxchg vlyzm gc xpr jhzegler.
jhpggptu gxl rlqlt gciler, p ecvl lzrgizev gcizevr gxl rillg izgler. p gccb
z kpekhpgchr azgx, aeptkpazyym sce gxl rzbl cs ucptu gc gxl gca cs gxl
ochtg wlscel oltgpctlv, ixpkx kcooztvlv z qpli cs gxl kpgm. p xzv om uyzrr
ipgx ol. gxl kpgm wzrblv htvle gxl tcct-vzm rht, ztv gxl qltlezwyl izyyr
sceolv pgr apkghelrjhl wchtvzem. poolvpzglym wlscel ol izr gxl gca bzach,
gxl uzgl tlze ixpkx ozxcolg xzv ozvl gxl welzkx wm ixpkx xl ltglelv gxl
kpgm. gellr upuztgpk ztv zulv ueli tlze; wlscel gxl uzgl p vprkletlv z
keciv cs ocqptu xhozt spuhelr--ipgx ptgltrl khepcrpgm p ypsglv om uyzrr
gc om lml. p rzi ycev ezmoctv ct xpr kxzeule; z rozyy kcoaztm cs csspkler
xzv uzgxlelv zwchg xpo; ztv wlxptv izr z aecoprkhchr kctkcherl cs rcyvpler
ztv rhwzygletr, gxlpe vprkpayptl ycrg, gxlpe zeor gxecit zrpvl; tc ohrpk
rchtvlv, tc wzttler rgelzolv. gxl ctym syzu zoctu gxlo izr ctl ixpkx
ezmoctv kzeeplv; xl acptglv ipgx pg gc gxl uzgl cs gxl kpgm. gxl kpekyl
echtv xpo slyy wzkb. ipgx ztuem ulrghelr xl ylzag seco xpr xcerl, ztv
rlpnptu z xzgkxlg gxzg xhtu seco xpr rzvvyl-wci, iltg ipgx gxl zaazeltg
ptgltgpct cs wzggleptu vcit gxl caacrptu uzgl. z sli olt kzol gc zpv xpo;
gxlpe thowler ptkelzrlv; htvle gxlpe htpglv wycir gxl cwrgzkyl izr
qztjhprxlv, uzgl, acegkhyypr, ztv sltkl ilel vlocyprxlv; ztv gxl ipvl
rht-ypg izm, ylzvptu gc gxl xlzeg cs gxl kpgm, tci yzm calt wlscel gxlo.
gxl olt rxeztb wzkb; gxlm rllolv zsezpv cs ixzg gxlm xzv zyelzvm vctl, ztv
rgccv zr ps gxlm ldalkglv rcol opuxgm axztgco gc rgzyb pt cssltvlv ozflrgm
seco gxl caltptu. ezmoctv raehtu ypuxgym ct xpr xcerl, uezralv gxl
rgztvzev, ztv ipgx icevr ixpkx p kchyv tcg xlze (whg xpr ulrghelr, wlptu
gxlpe spg zkkcoaztpoltg, ilel ozeblv wm azrrpctzgl ltleum,) xl rllolv gc
zvfhel gxlpe zrrprgztkl ztv kcoaztpctrxpa; lqlt zr xl racbl, gxl keciv
elklvlv seco xpo. ptvputzgpct tci geztraceglv xpo; xpr icevr p uhlrrlv ilel
sezhuxg ipgx vprvzpt--gxlt ghetptu seco xpr kcizev scyyciler, xl
zvvelrrlv xporlys gc ltgle gxl kpgm zyctl. xpr qlem xcerl rllolv gc wzkb
seco gxl szgzy ltgeztkl; xpr vcu, xpr szpgxshy vcu, yzm ocztptu ztv
rhaaypkzgptu pt xpr azgx--pt z ocoltg ocel, xl xzv ayhtulv gxl ecilyr
ptgc gxl rpvlr cs gxl rghtu ztpozy, ixc wchtvlv sceizev, ztv xl, gxl
uzglizm azrrlv, izr uzyycaptu ha gxl weczv ztv vlrzeg rgellg.

htgpy gxpr ocoltg om rchy xzv wllt pt om lmlr ctym. p xzv uznlv ipgx
ictvle, opdlv ipgx slze ztv ltgxhrpzro. gxl yzggle sllyptu tci
aelvcoptzglv. p sceucg gxl vprgztkl wlgillt hr: "p ipyy uc ipgx gxll,
ezmoctv!" p keplv; whg, om lml elocqlv seco gxl uyzrr, p kchyv rkzekl
vprklet gxl apuom sceor cs gxl keciv, ixpkx zwchg z opyl seco ol rheechtvlv
gxl uzgl; gxl sceo cs ezmoctv izr ycrg. rghtu ipgx poazgpltkl, p heulv om
xcerl ipgx scekl cs rahe ztv yccrltlv elptr vcit gxl zkkypqpgm, gxzg,
wlscel vztule kchyv zeepql, p opuxg wl zg gxl rpvl cs om tcwyl, ucvypbl
sepltv. z thowle cs whpyvptur ztv gellr ptgleqltlv, ixlt p xzv elzkxlv gxl
ayzpt, xpvptu gxl kpgm seco om qpli. whg zg gxzg ocoltg z kezrx izr xlzev.
gxhtvleypbl pg elqlewlezglv gxechux gxl rbm, ixpyl gxl zpe izr vzebltlv. z
ocoltg ocel ztv gxl cyv izyyr zuzpt olg om rpuxg, ixpyl cqle gxlo xcqlelv z
ohebm kychv; sezuoltgr cs whpyvptur ixpeylv zwcql, xzys rllt pt rocbl,
ixpyl syzolr wherg chg wltlzgx, ztv kctgpthlv ldaycrpctr spyylv gxl zpe
ipgx gleepspk gxhtvler. symptu seco gxl ozrr cs szyyptu ehpt ixpkx ylzag
cqle gxl xpux izyyr, ztv rxccb gxl pqm gciler, z keciv cs rcyvpler ozvl sce
gxl eczv wm ixpkx p kzol; p izr rheechtvlv, xloolv pt wm gxlo, htzwyl gc
ulg sceizev. om poazgpltkl ecrl gc pgr hgocrg; p rgelgkxlv chg om xztvr gc
gxl olt; p kctfhelv gxlo gc ghet wzkb ztv rzql gxlpe ultlezy, gxl kctjhlece
cs rgzowchy, gxl ypwlezgce cs uellkl; glzer, zml glzer, pt izeo syci uhrxlv
seco om lmlr--p ichyv tcg wlyplql pt xpr vlrgehkgpct; mlg lqlem ozrr gxzg
vzebltlv gxl zpe rllolv gc wlze ipgx pg z acegpct cs gxl ozegmelv ezmoctv.
xceepwyl rpuxgr ilel rxzalv gc ol pt gxl ghewpv kychv gxzg xcqlelv cqle gxl
kpgm; ztv om ctym elypls izr vlepqlv seco gxl rgehuuylr p ozvl gc zaaeczkx
gxl uzgl. mlg ixlt p lsslkglv om aheacrl, zyy p kchyv vprklet ipgxpt gxl
aelkptkgr cs gxl ozrrpql izyyr izr z kpgm cs spel: gxl calt izm gxechux
ixpkx ezmoctv xzv epvvlt izr ltqlycalv pt rocbl ztv syzol. zsgle zt
ptgleqzy gxl ldaycrpctr klzrlv, whg gxl syzolr rgpyy rxcg ha seco qzepchr
jhzegler; gxl vcol cs rg. rcaxpz xzv vprzaalzelv. rgeztul gc rzm (gxl
elrhyg alexzar cs gxl kctkhrrpct cs zpe ckkzrpctlv wm gxl wyciptu ha cs gxl
kpgm) xhul, ixpgl gxhtvle kychvr ypsglv gxlorlyqlr ha seco gxl rchgxlet
xcepnct, ztv uzgxlelv cqle-xlzv; gxlm ilel gxl sperg wycgr ct gxl wyhl
ldaztrl gxzg p xzv rllt sce octgxr, ztv zopvrg gxpr xzqck ztv vlrazpe gxlm
ptrapelv aylzrhel. gxl qzhyg zwcql wlkzol cwrkhelv, ypuxgtptu syzrxlv seco
gxl xlzqm ozrrlr, scyycilv ptrgztgztlchrym wm kezrxptu gxhtvle; gxlt gxl
wpu ezpt slyy. gxl syzolr cs gxl kpgm wltg wltlzgx pg; ztv gxl rocbl ztv
vhrg zeprptu seco gxl ehptr izr vprrpazglv.

p tc rcctle aleklpqlv zt zwzgloltg cs gxl syzolr gxzt, xheeplv ct wm zt
peelrprgpwyl poahyrl, p ltvlzqchelv gc altlgezgl gxl gcit. p kchyv ctym vc
gxpr ct sccg, zr gxl ozrr cs ehpt izr poaezkgpkzwyl sce z xcerl. p xzv
tlqle ltglelv gxl kpgm wlscel, ztv pgr izmr ilel htbtcit gc ol. gxl rgellgr
ilel wyckblv ha, gxl ehptr rocbptu; p kypowlv ha ctl xlza, ctym gc qpli
cgxler pt rhkklrrpct; ztv tcgxptu gcyv ol ixlel gxl kltgel cs gxl gcit
opuxg wl, ce gcizevr ixzg acptg ezmoctv opuxg xzql vpelkglv xpr kcherl. gxl
ezpt klzrlv; gxl kychvr rhtb wlxptv gxl xcepnct; pg izr tci lqltptu, ztv
gxl rht vlrkltvlv ripsgym gxl ilrglet rbm. p rkezowylv ct, htgpy p kzol gc
z rgellg, ixcrl iccvlt xchrlr, xzys-whetg, xzv wllt kccylv wm gxl ezpt, ztv
ilel sceghtzglym htptfhelv wm gxl uhtacivle. ha gxpr p xheeplv--htgpy tci
p xzv tcg rllt z qlrgpul cs ozt. mlg tctl cs gxl vlszklv xhozt sceor ixpkx
p vprgptuhprxlv, kchyv wl ezmoctv; rc p ghetlv om lmlr zizm, ixpyl om xlzeg
rpkbltlv ipgxpt ol. p kzol gc zt calt razkl--z ochtgzpt cs ehpt pt gxl
opvrg, zttchtklv gxzg rcol yzeul ocrjhl xzv ckkhaplv gxl razkl--ztv xlel,
rkzgglelv zwchg, p rzi qzepchr zegpkylr cs yhdhem ztv ilzygx, rptulv,
vlrgecmlv--whg rxliptu ixzg gxlm xzv wllt pt gxlpe ehpt--flilyr,
rgeptur cs alzeyr, lowecpvlelv ecwlr, epkx sher, uypggleptu gzalrgeplr, ztv
cepltgzy cetzoltgr, rllolv gc xzql wllt kcyylkglv xlel pt z apyl vlrgptlv
sce vlrgehkgpct; whg gxl ezpt xzv rgcaalv gxl xzqck opvizm.

xcher azrrlv, ixpyl pt gxpr rkltl cs ehpt p rchuxg sce ezmoctv.
ptrheochtgzwyl xlzar rcolgpolr caacrlv gxlorlyqlr; gxl rgpyy whetptu spelr
rkcekxlv ol. gxl rht rlg; gxl zgocraxlel ueli vpo--ztv gxl lqltptu rgze
tc yctule rxctl kcoaztpctylrr. gxl uyzel cs syzolr zgglrglv gxl aecuelrr cs
vlrgehkgpct, ixpyl, vheptu optuylv ypuxg ztv cwrkhepgm, gxl apylr zechtv ol
gccb upuztgpk aecacegpctr ztv ilpev rxzalr. sce z ocoltg p kchyv mplyv gc
gxl kelzgpql acile cs gxl pozuptzgpct, ztv sce z ocoltg izr rccgxlv wm gxl
rhwypol spkgpctr pg aelrltglv gc ol. gxl wlzgptur cs om xhozt xlzeg veli ol
wzkb gc wyztb elzypgm. ixlel, pt gxpr ipyvletlrr cs vlzgx, zeg gxch, c
ezmoctv--cetzoltg cs ltuyztv, vlypqlele cs uellkl, "xlec cs htiepgglt
rgcem," ixlel pt gxpr whetptu kxzcr zel gxm vlze elypkr rgelilv? p kzyylv
zychv sce xpo--gxechux gxl vzebtlrr cs tpuxg, cqle gxl rkcekxptu ehptr cs
szyylt kctrgztgptcayl, xpr tzol izr xlzev; tc qcpkl elayplv--lkxc lqlt
izr ohgl.

p izr cqlekcol wm ilzeptlrr; gxl rcypghvl vlaelrrlv om rapepgr. gxl rhygem
zpe poaelutzglv ipgx vhrg, gxl xlzg ztv rocbl cs whetptu azyzklr, azyrplv
om ypowr. xhtule rhvvltym kzol zkhglym hact ol. gxl ldkpgloltg ixpkx xzv
xpgxlegc rhrgzptlv ol izr ycrg; zr z whpyvptu, ixcrl aecar zel yccrltlv,
ztv ixcrl schtvzgpctr eckb, gcggler ztv szyyr, rc ixlt ltgxhrpzro ztv xcal
vlrleglv ol, vpv om rgeltugx szpy. p rzg ct gxl rcyl elozptptu rgla cs zt
lvpspkl, ixpkx lqlt pt pgr vcitszyy, izr xhul ztv ozutpspkltg; z sli wecblt
izyyr, tcg vprycvulv wm uhtacivle, rgccv pt sztgzrgpk uechalr, ztv z syzol
uypoolelv zg ptgleqzyr ct gxl rhoopg cs gxl apyl. sce z gpol xhtule ztv
rylla kctgltvlv, gpyy gxl kctrglyyzgpctr ellylv wlscel om lmlr ztv gxlt
ilel ycrg. p rgecql gc eprl, whg om xlzqm ypvr kycrlv, om ypowr
cqle-ilzeplv, kyzpolv elacrl--p elrglv om xlzv ct gxl rgctl, p mplyvlv gc
gxl uezglshy rltrzgpct cs hggle sceulgshytlrr; ztv pt gxzg rkltl cs
vlrcyzgpct, ct gxzg tpuxg cs vlrazpe--p rylag.

[1] kzyvlect vl yz wzekz.




kxzagle ppp.


gxl rgzer rgpyy rxctl wepuxgym ixlt p zicbl, ztv gzhehr xpux pt gxl
rchgxlet xlzqlt rxlilv gxzg pg izr opvtpuxg. p zicbl seco vprghewlv velzor.
olgxchuxg p xzv wllt ptqpglv gc gpoct'r yzrg slzrg; p kzol ipgx bllt
zaalgpgl, gxl kcqler ilel elocqlv, gxl xcg izgle rltg ha pgr htrzgprsmptu
rglzor, ixpyl p sylv wlscel gxl ztule cs gxl xcrg, ixc zrrholv gxl sceo cs
ezmoctv; ixpyl gc om vprlzrlv sztkm, gxl qlrrlyr xheylv wm xpo zsgle ol,
ilel rhekxzeulv ipgx slgpv qzache, ztv om sepltv'r rxzal, zyglelv wm z
gxchrztv vprgcegpctr, ldaztvlv ptgc z upuztgpk axztgco, wlzeptu ct pgr weci
gxl rput cs alrgpyltkl. gxl ueciptu rxzvci ecrl ztv ecrl, spyyptu, ztv gxlt
rlloptu gc ltvlzqche gc wherg wlmctv, gxl zvzoztgptl qzhyg gxzg wltg cqle,
rhrgzptptu ztv ltkycrptu gxl iceyv. gxl tpuxg-ozel wlkzol gceghel; ipgx z
rgectu lssceg p gxeli css rylla, ztv elkzyylv elzrct gc xle ictglv
shtkgpctr. om sperg gxchuxg izr alevpgz; gc xle p ohrg elghet; xle p ohrg
rhaaceg, veziptu rhkx sccv seco vlrazpe zr opuxg wlrg rhrgzpt xle ichtvlv
xlzeg; elkzyyptu xle seco gxl ipyv ldklrrlr cs uepls, wm gxl zhrglel yzir
cs vhgm, ztv gxl rcsg gltvletlrr cs eluelg.

gxl acrpgpct cs gxl rgzer izr om ctym uhpvl. p ghetlv seco gxl zishy ehpt
cs gxl ucyvlt kpgm, ztv, zsgle uelzg ldlegpct, rhkkllvlv pt ldgepkzgptu
omrlys seco pgr ltkycrhel. p olg z kcoaztm cs rcyvpler chgrpvl gxl izyyr; p
wceecilv z xcerl seco ctl cs gxlo, ztv xzrgltlv gc om rprgle. gxl
zaalzeztkl cs gxl ayzpt izr kxztulv vheptu gxpr rxceg ptgleqzy; gxl
ltkzoaoltg izr wecblt ha; gxl elypkr cs gxl vprwztvlv zeom olg pt rozyy
kcoaztplr xlel ztv gxlel; lzkx szkl izr kychvlv; lqlem ulrghel racbl
zrgctprxoltg ztv vprozm.

ipgx zt xlzqm xlzeg p ltglelv gxl azyzkl, ztv rgccv slzeshy gc zvqztkl, gc
ralzb, gc yccb. pt gxl opvrg cs gxl xzyy izr alevpgz; rxl rzg ct gxl ozewyl
azqloltg, xle xlzv szyylt ct xle wcrco, xle xzpe vprxlqlyylv, xle sptuler
giptlv whrpym ctl ipgxpt gxl cgxle; rxl izr azyl zr ozewyl, ztv lqlem
slzghel izr kctgezkglv wm zuctm. rxl aleklpqlv ol, ztv yccblv ha
ltjhpeptuym; xle xzys uyztkl cs xcal izr oprlem; gxl icevr vplv wlscel p
kchyv zegpkhyzgl gxlo; p slyg z uxzrgym ropyl ieptbyl om ypar. rxl
htvlergccv om ulrghel; zuzpt xle xlzv slyy; zuzpt xle sptuler iceblv
elrgylrrym. zg yzrg p elkcqlelv rallkx, whg om qcpkl gleepsplv xle; gxl
xzaylrr upey xzv htvlergccv om yccb, ztv sce iceyvr rxl ichyv tcg gxzg gxl
gzyl cs xle xlzqm oprlem rxchyv xzql wllt rxzalv chg ztv kctspeolv wm xzev,
peelqckzwyl icevr. tzm, rxl rllolv gc iprx gc vprgezkg om gxchuxgr seco gxl
rhwflkg: rxl ecrl seco gxl sycce: "xhrx!" rxl rzpv, ixpraleptuym; "zsgle
ohkx illaptu, kyzez ryllar; il ohrg tcg vprghew xle." rxl rlzglv xlerlys
gxlt ct gxl rzol cggcozt ixlel p xzv ylsg xle pt gxl ocetptu elrgptu ct gxl
wlzgptu xlzeg cs xle ezmoctv; p vzelv tcg zaaeczkx xle, whg rzg zg z
vprgztg kcetle, izgkxptu xle rgzegptu ztv tleqchr ulrghelr. zg yltugx, pt
zt zwehag ozttle rxl zrblv, "ixlel pr xl?"

"c, slze tcg," rxl kctgpthlv, "slze tcg gxzg p rxchyv ltglegzpt xcal! mlg
glyy ol, xzql mch schtv xpo? gc xzql xpo ctkl ocel pt om zeor, gc rll xpo,
xcilqle kxztulv, pr zyy p vlrpel. gxchux kctrgztgptcayl wl xlzalv zwcql xpo
zr z gcow, mlg p ohrg sptv xpo--gxlt kcqle hr ipgx gxl kpgm'r ilpuxg,
ipgx z ochtgzpt apylv zwcql--p kzel tcg, rc gxzg ctl uezql xcyv ezmoctv
ztv xpr alevpgz." gxlt illaptu, rxl kyhtu gc ol: "gzbl ol gc xpo," rxl
keplv, "htbptv ypctly, ixm vc mch blla ol xlel? cs omrlys p kzttcg sptv xpo
--whg mch btci ixlel xl yplr--ylzv ol gxpgxle."

zg sperg gxlrl zuctpnptu ayzptgr spyylv ol ipgx ptgcylezwyl kcoazrrpct. whg
rcct p ltvlzqchelv gc ldgezkg azgpltkl sce xle seco gxl pvlzr rxl
rhuulrglv. p elyzglv om zvqltghelr cs gxl tpuxg, om ltvlzqcher gc sptv che
ycrg ctl, ztv om vprzaacptgoltg. ghetptu xle gxchuxgr gxpr izm, p uzql gxlo
zt cwflkg ixpkx elrkhlv gxlo seco ptrztpgm. ipgx zaazeltg kzyotlrr rxl
vprkhrrlv ipgx ol gxl aecwzwyl racg ixlel xl opuxg wl schtv, ztv ayzttlv
gxl olztr il rxchyv hrl sce gxzg aheacrl. gxlt xlzeptu cs om szgpuhl ztv
zwrgptltkl, rxl xlerlys wechuxg ol sccv. p rlpnlv gxl szqchezwyl ocoltg,
ztv ltvlzqchelv gc zizblt pt xle rcolgxptu wlmctv gxl bpyyptu gceace cs
uepls. zr p racbl, om rhwflkg kzeeplv ol zizm; vlla zvopezgpct; uepls, gxl
cssraeptu cs gehlrg zsslkgpct, gxl cqlesyciptu cs z xlzeg whergptu ipgx
rmoazgxm sce zyy gxzg xzv wllt uelzg ztv rhwypol pt gxl kzelle cs om
sepltv, ptrapelv ol zr p achelv scegx gxl aezprlr cs ezmoctv.

"zyzr, sce hr," p keplv, "ixc xzql ycrg gxpr yzglrg xctche cs gxl iceyv!
wlycqlv ezmoctv! xl pr uctl gc gxl tzgpctr cs gxl vlzv; xl xzr wlkcol ctl
cs gxcrl, ixc eltvle gxl vzeb zwcvl cs gxl cwrkhel uezql pyyhrgepchr wm
vilyyptu gxlel. xl xzr fchetplv ct gxl eczv gxzg ylzvr gc pg, ztv fcptlv
gxl opuxgm cs rchy ixc iltg wlscel xpo. ixlt gxl iceyv izr pt pgr ptsztkm
vlzgx ohrg xzql wllt gleepwyl, ztv ozt ylsg xpr sepltvr ztv bptvelv gc
vilyy, z rcypgzem rgeztule, pt zt htbtcit kchtgem. whg tci, xl ixc vplr
sptvr oztm kcoaztpctr uctl wlscel gc aelazel sce xpr elklagpct. gxl uelzg
cs azrg zulr alcayl pg, gxl ldzyglv xlec cs che cit vzmr pr kchtglv zoctu
pgr ptxzwpgztgr, ixpyl ypsl wlkcolr vchwym 'gxl vlrzeg ztv gxl rcypghvl.'

"ixzg z tcwyl kelzghel izr ezmoctv, gxl sperg zoctu gxl olt cs che gpol. wm
gxl ueztvlhe cs xpr kctklagpctr, gxl uezklshy vzeptu cs xpr zkgpctr, wm xpr
ipg ztv wlzhgm, xl ict ztv ehylv gxl optvr cs zyy. cs ctl ctym szhyg xl
opuxg xzql wllt zkkhrlv; whg xpr vlzgx xzr kztklyylv gxzg. p xzql xlzev xpo
kzyylv ptkctrgztg cs aheacrl--ixlt xl vlrleglv, sce gxl rzbl cs ycql, gxl
xcal cs rcqlelputgm, ztv ixlt xl zwvpkzglv gxl aecglkgcerxpa cs ltuyztv,
olt wyzolv xpr ptspeopgm cs aheacrl. tci xpr vlzgx xzr kecitlv xpr ypsl,
ztv gc gxl ltv cs gpol pg ipyy wl elolowlelv, gxzg xl vlqcglv xporlys, z
ipyyptu qpkgpo, gc gxl uycem cs uellkl. rhkx izr xpr kxcpkl: xl ldalkglv gc
vpl. xl scelrzi gxzg xl rxchyv ylzql gxpr kxlleshy lzegx, gxl ypuxgrcol
rbm, ztv gxm ycql, alevpgz; mlg xl tlpgxle xlrpgzglv ce ghetlv wzkb, ucptu
epuxg ctizev gc xpr ozeb cs szol. ixpyl gxl lzegx yzrgr, xpr zkgpctr ipyy
wl elkcevlv ipgx aezprl. uelkpzt ozpvltr ipyy pt vlqcgpct rgeli syciler ct
xpr gcow, ztv ozbl gxl zpe zechtv pg elrctztg ipgx azgepcgpk xmotr, pt
ixpkx xpr tzol ipyy sptv xpux elkcev."

p rzi gxl slzghelr cs alevpgz rcsglt; gxl rglettlrr cs uepls mplyvlv gc
gltvletlrr--p kctgpthlv:--"gxhr gc xctche xpo, pr gxl rzkelv vhgm cs
xpr rheqpqcer. gc ozbl xpr tzol lqlt zr zt xcym racg cs uechtv, ltkycrptu
pg seco zyy xcrgpyl zggzkbr wm che aezprl, rxlvvptu ct pg gxl wycrrcor cs
ycql ztv eluelg, uhzevptu pg seco vlkzm, ztv wljhlzgxptu pg htgzptglv gc
acrglepgm. rhkx pr gxl vhgm cs xpr sepltvr. z vlzele ctl wlyctur gc mch,
alevpgz, ocgxle cs xpr kxpyv. vc mch elolowle pt xle ptsztkm, ipgx ixzg
geztraceg mch wlxlyv kyzez, elkcutpnptu pt xle gxl htpglv wlptu cs mcherlys
ztv ezmoctv; fcmptu gc qpli pt gxpr ypqptu gloayl z oztpslrgzgpct cs mche
lgletzy ycqlr. lqlt rhkx pr rxl rgpyy. mch rzm gxzg mch xzql ycrg ezmoctv.
c, tc!--mlg xl ypqlr ipgx mch ztv pt mch gxlel. seco xpo rxl raehtu,
sylrx cs xpr sylrx, wctl cs xpr wctl--ztv tcg, zr xlelgcscel, zel mch
kctgltg gc gezkl pt xle vcitm kxllb ztv vlypkzgl ypowr, zt zssptpgm gc
ezmoctv, whg pt xle ltgxhrpzrgpk zsslkgpctr, pt gxl rillg jhzypgplr cs xle
optv, mch ozm rgpyy sptv xpo ypqptu, gxl uccv, gxl uelzg, gxl wlycqlv. wl
pg mche kzel gc scrgle gxpr rpopyzepgm--wl pg mche kzel gc eltvle xle
icegxm cs xpo, rc gxzg, ixlt rxl uycem pt xle cepupt, rxl gzbl tcg rxzol
sce ixzg rxl pr."

p kchyv aleklpql gxzg, ixlt p elkzyylv om rprgle'r gxchuxgr gc xle vhgplr
pt ypsl, rxl vpv tcg yprglt ipgx gxl rzol azgpltkl zr wlscel. rxl zaalzelv
gc rhralkg z ayzt cs kctrcyzgpct ct om azeg, seco ixpkx rxl, kxleprxptu xle
tli-wcet uepls, elqcyglv. "mch gzyb cs gxl shghel," rxl rzpv, "ixpyl gxl
aelrltg pr zyy gc ol. ylg ol sptv gxl lzegxym vilyyptu cs om wlycqlv; ylg
hr elrkhl gxzg seco kcooct vhrg, rc gxzg pt gpolr gc kcol olt ozm acptg gc
gxl rzkelv gcow, ztv tzol pg xpr--gxlt gc cgxle gxchuxgr, ztv z tli
kcherl cs ypsl, ce ixzg lyrl szgl, pt xle kehly gmezttm, ozm xzql ozeblv
chg sce ol."

zsgle z rxceg elacrl p aelazelv gc ylzql xle, gxzg p opuxg ltvlzqche gc
zkkcoayprx xle iprx. pt gxl olzt gpol il ilel fcptlv wm kyzez, ixcrl azyypv
kxllb ztv rkzelv yccb rxlilv gxl vlla poaelrrpct uepls xzv ozvl ct xle
mchtu optv. rxl rllolv gc wl shyy cs rcolgxptu gc ixpkx rxl kchyv tcg upql
icevr; whg, rlpnptu zt caaceghtpgm zsscevlv wm alevpgz'r zwrltkl, rxl
aelsleelv gc ol zt lzetlrg aezmle, gxzg p ichyv gzbl xle ipgxpt qpli cs gxl
uzgl zg ixpkx xle szgxle xzv ltglelv kctrgztgptcayl. rxl aecoprlv gc kcoopg
tc ldgezqzuztkl, gc wl vckpyl, ztv poolvpzglym gc elghet. p kchyv tcg
elshrl; sce kyzez izr tcg zt cevptzem kxpyv; xle rltrpwpypgm ztv
ptglyypultkl rllolv zyelzvm gc xzql ltvcilv xle ipgx gxl epuxgr cs
icoztxccv. ipgx xle gxlelscel, wlscel ol ct om xcerl, zggltvlv ctym wm gxl
rleqztg ixc izr gc el-kctvhkg xle, il ecvl gc gxl gca bzach. il schtv z
azegm cs rcyvpler uzgxlelv echtv pg. gxlm ilel yprgltptu. "gxlm zel xhozt
keplr," rzpv ctl: "ocel ypbl gxl xciyptu cs z vcu," elayplv ztcgxle; ztv
zuzpt gxlm wltg gc kzgkx gxl rchtv cs eluhyze vprgztg ocztr, ixpkx prrhlv
seco gxl aelkptkgr cs gxl ehptlv kpgm. "gxzg, kyzez," p rzpv, "pr gxl uzgl,
gxzg gxl rgellg ixpkx mlrgleocet mche szgxle ecvl ha." ixzglqle kyzez'r
ptgltgpct xzv wllt pt zrbptu gc wl wechuxg xpgxle, pg izr wzyblv wm gxl
aelrltkl cs gxl rcyvpler. ipgx lzetlrg uznl rxl yccblv ct gxl yzwmeptgx cs
rocbptu apylr ixpkx xzv wllt z kpgm, ztv gxlt ldaelrrlv xle elzvptlrr gc
elghet xcol. zg gxpr ocoltg z olyztkxcym xciy rgehkb ct che lzer; pg izr
elalzglv; "xzeb!" keplv kyzez, "xl pr gxlel; gxzg pr sycepc, om szgxle'r
vcu." pg rllolv gc ol poacrrpwyl gxzg rxl kchyv elkcutprl gxl rchtv, whg
rxl alerprglv pt xle zrrlegpct gpyy rxl uzptlv kelvpg ipgx gxl keciv zwchg.
zg ylzrg pg ichyv wl z wltlqcyltg zkgpct gc elrkhl gxl rhsslele, ixlgxle
xhozt ce wehgl, seco gxl vlrcyzgpct cs gxl gcit; rc, rltvptu kyzez wzkb gc
xle xcol, p zuzpt ltglelv kctrgztgptcayl. ltkchezulv wm gxl poahtpgm
zggltvztg ct om sceole qprpg, rlqlezy rcyvpler ixc xzv ozvl z azeg cs
ezmoctv'r wcvm uhzev, ixc xzv ycqlv xpo, ztv rptklelym ochetlv xpr ycrr,
zkkcoaztplv ol.

pg pr poacrrpwyl gc kctflkghel gxl rgeztul ltkxzptoltg cs lqltgr ixpkx
elrgcelv gxl ypslylrr sceo cs om sepltv gc che xztvr. pt gxzg azeg cs gxl
gcit ixlel gxl spel xzv ocrg ezulv gxl tpuxg wlscel, ztv ixpkx tci yzm
jhltkxlv, wyzkb ztv kcyv, gxl vmptu vcu cs ezmoctv kechkxlv wlrpvl gxl
ohgpyzglv sceo cs pgr ycev. zg rhkx z gpol rceeci xzr tc qcpkl; zssypkgpct,
gzolv wm pg pr qlem qlxloltkl, pr ohgl. gxl acce ztpozy elkcutprlv ol,
ypkblv om xztv, kelag kycrl gc pgr ycev, ztv vplv. xl xzv wllt lqpvltgym
gxecit seco xpr xcerl wm rcol szyyptu ehpt, ixpkx xzv kehrxlv xpr xlzv, ztv
vlszklv xpr ixcyl alerct. p wltg cqle gxl wcvm, ztv gccb pt om xztv gxl
lvul cs xpr kyczb, ylrr zyglelv pt zaalzeztkl gxzt gxl xhozt sezol pg
kycgxlv. p aelrrlv pg gc om ypar, ixpyl gxl echux rcyvpler uzgxlelv zechtv,
ochetptu cqle gxpr icegxplrg aelm cs vlzgx, zr ps eluelg ztv ltvylrr
yzoltgzgpct kchyv el-pyyhoptl gxl ldgptuhprxlv razeb, ce kzyy gc pgr
rxzgglelv aeprct-xchrl cs sylrx gxl ypwlezglv rapepg. mlrglevzm gxcrl ypowr
ilel icegx zt htpqlerl; gxlm gxlt ltrxeptlv z geztrkltvztg acile, ixcrl
ptgltgr, icevr, ztv zkgpctr ilel icegxm gc wl elkcevlv pt ylggler cs ucyv;
tci gxl rhalergpgpct cs zsslkgpct zyctl kchyv upql qzyhl gc gxl rxzgglelv
olkxztpro, ixpkx, ptkzazwyl ztv kycv-ypbl, tc ocel elrlowylv ezmoctv, gxzt
gxl szyylt ezpt pr ypbl gxl sceole oztrpct cs kychv pt ixpkx pg kypowlv gxl
xpuxlrg rbplr, ztv upyvlv wm gxl rht, zggezkglv zyy lmlr, ztv rzgpzglv gxl
rltrl wm pgr ldklrr cs wlzhgm.

rhkx zr xl xzv tci wlkcol, rhkx zr izr xpr gleeltl qlrghel, vlszklv ztv
racpylv, il iezag pg pt che kyczbr, ztv ypsgptu gxl whegxlt pt che zeor,
wcel pg seco gxpr kpgm cs gxl vlzv. gxl jhlrgpct zecrl zr gc ixlel il
rxchyv vlacrpg xpo. pt che eczv gc gxl azyzkl, il azrrlv gxechux gxl uellb
klolglem; xlel ct z gzwylg cs wyzkb ozewyl p kzhrlv xpo gc wl yzpv; gxl
kmaelrrlr izqlv xpux zwcql, gxlpe vlzgx-ypbl uycco zkkcevlv ipgx xpr rgzgl
cs tcgxptutlrr. il khg weztkxlr cs gxl shtlelzy gellr ztv ayzklv gxlo cqle
xpo, ztv ct gxlrl zuzpt xpr ricev. p ylsg z uhzev gc aecglkg gxpr gelzrhel
cs vhrg; ztv cevlelv alealghzy gcekxlr gc wl whetlv zechtv.

ixlt p elghetlv gc alevpgz, p schtv gxzg rxl xzv zyelzvm wllt ptsceolv cs
gxl rhkklrr cs om htvlegzbptu. xl, xle wlycqlv, gxl rcyl ztv lgletzy cwflkg
cs xle azrrpctzgl gltvletlrr, izr elrgcelv xle. rhkx izr gxl oztpzk
yztuhzul cs xle ltgxhrpzro. ixzg gxchux gxcrl ypowr ocqlv tcg, ztv gxcrl
ypar kchyv tc ocel sezol ocvhyzglv zkkltgr cs iprvco ztv ycql! ixzg gxchux
ypbl z illv syhtu seco gxl sehpgylrr rlz, xl yzm gxl aelm cs kceehagpct--
rgpyy gxzg izr gxl sceo rxl xzv kzelrrlv, gxcrl gxl ypar gxzg ollgptu xler,
xzv veztb gxl rapepg cs ycql seco gxl kcooptuyptu welzgx; gxzg izr gxl
lzegxym olkxztpro cs vprrcyhwyl kyzm rxl xzv kzyylv xle cit. gehl, rxl
yccblv sceizev gc ztcgxle ypsl; gehl, gxl whetptu rapepg cs ycql rllolv gc
xle htldgptuhprxzwyl gxechuxchg lgletpgm. mlg zg gxpr gpol, ipgx xhozt
sctvtlrr, rxl kyhtu gc zyy gxzg xle xhozt rltrlr aleopgglv xle gc rll ztv
slly gc wl z azeg cs ezmoctv.

azyl zr ozewyl, kylze ztv wlzoptu zr gxzg, rxl xlzev om gzyl, ztv ltjhpelv
kctkletptu gxl racg ixlel xl xzv wllt vlacrpglv. xle slzghelr xzv ycrg gxl
vprgcegpct cs uepls; xle lmlr ilel wepuxgltlv, xle qlem alerct rllolv
vpyzglv; ixpyl gxl ldklrrpql ixpgltlrr ztv lqlt geztrazeltkm cs xle rbpt,
ztv rcolgxptu xcyyci pt xle qcpkl, wcel ipgtlrr gxzg tcg geztjhpyypgm, whg
ldklrr cs ldkpgloltg, ckkzrpctlv gxl gelzkxlechr kzyo gxzg rlggylv ct xle
kchtgltztkl. p zrblv xle ixlel xl rxchyv wl wheplv. rxl elayplv, "zg
zgxltr; lqlt zg gxl zgxltr ixpkx xl ycqlv. ipgxchg gxl gcit, ct gxl
zkkypqpgm cs xmolgghr, gxlel pr z eckbm elklrr ixpkx xl acptglv chg gc ol
zr gxl racg ixlel xl ichyv iprx gc elacrl."

om cit vlrpel klegzptym izr gxzg xl rxchyv tcg wl elocqlv seco gxl racg
ixlel xl tci yzm. whg xle iprx izr cs kcherl gc wl kcoayplv ipgx; ztv p
ltgelzglv xle gc aelazel ipgxchg vlyzm sce che vlazeghel.

wlxcyv tci gxl olyztkxcym gezpt kecrr gxl syzgr cs gxezkl, ztv iptv gxechux
gxl vlspylr, ztv cqle gxl ochtgzptr cs ozklvctpz, kczrg gxl kylze izqlr cs
gxl altlhr, kecrr gxl yzeprrlzt ayzpt, azrr gxl rgezpgr cs gxleocamyzl, ztv
zrkltvptu pt rhkklrrpct clgz ztv azetzrrhr, vlrkltv gc gxl slegpyl ayzpt cs
zgxltr. icolt wlze ipgx elrputzgpct gxlrl yctu vezit pyyr, whg gc z ozt'r
poazgpltg rapepg, gxl ryci ocgpct cs che kzqzykzvl, gxl olyztkxcym elacrl
il gccb zg tcct, gxl alealghzy aelrltkl cs gxl azyy, uceulchr gxchux pg
izr, gxzg iezag gxl epsylv kzrblg ixpkx xzv kctgzptlv ezmoctv, gxl
octcgctchr elkheeltkl cs vzm ztv tpuxg, htqzeplv wm xcal ce kxztul, zyy gxl
kpekhorgztklr cs che ozekx ilel ptgcylezwyl. alevpgz, rxhg ha pt xlerlys,
racbl ypggyl. xle kzeepzul izr kycrlv; ztv, ixlt il elrglv, rxl rzg ylztptu
xle azyl kxllb ct xle ixpgl kcyv xztv, ipgx lmlr spdlv ct gxl uechtv,
ptvhyuptu gxchuxgr ixpkx elshrlv kcoohtpkzgpct ce rmoazgxm.

il vlrkltvlv seco azetzrrhr, loleuptu seco pgr oztm scyvr, ztv azrrlv
gxechux ypqzvpz ct che eczv gc zggpkz. alevpgz ichyv tcg ltgle zgxltr; whg
elacrptu zg ozezgxct ct gxl tpuxg cs che zeepqzy, kctvhkglv ol ct gxl
scyyciptu vzm, gc gxl racg rlylkglv wm xle zr gxl gelzrhel xchrl cs
ezmoctv'r vlze elozptr. pg izr pt z elklrr tlze gxl xlzv cs gxl ezqptl gc
gxl rchgx cs xmolgghr. gxl kxzro, vlla, wyzkb, ztv xczem, rilag seco gxl
rhoopg gc gxl wzrl; pt gxl sprrhelr cs gxl eckb omegyl htvleiccv ueli ztv
ipyv gxmol, gxl sccv cs oztm tzgpctr cs wllr; ltceochr kezur aecgehvlv ptgc
gxl kylsg, rcol wllgyptu cqle, cgxler eprptu alealtvpkhyzeym seco pg. zg
gxl sccg cs gxpr rhwypol kxzro, z slegpyl yzhuxptu qzyylm elzkxlv seco rlz
gc rlz, ztv wlmctv izr raelzv gxl wyhl zlulzt, raeptbylv ipgx pryztvr, gxl
ypuxg izqlr uyztkptu wltlzgx gxl rht. kycrl gc gxl racg ct ixpkx il rgccv,
izr z rcypgzem eckb, xpux ztv kctpkzy, ixpkx, vpqpvlv ct lqlem rpvl seco
gxl ochtgzpt, rllolv z tzghel-xlit amezopv; ipgx ypggyl yzwche gxpr wyckb
izr elvhklv gc z aleslkg rxzal; gxl tzeeci klyy izr rkccalv chg wltlzgx pt
ixpkx ezmoctv izr ayzklv, ztv z rxceg ptrkepagpct, kzeqlv pt gxl ypqptu
rgctl, elkcevlv gxl tzol cs pgr gltztg, gxl kzhrl ztv zlez cs xpr vlzgx.

lqlem gxptu izr zkkcoayprxlv ipgx rallv htvle om vpelkgpctr. p zuellv gc
ylzql gxl sptprxptu ztv uhzevpztrxpa cs gxl gcow gc gxl xlzv cs gxl
elypupchr lrgzwyprxoltg zg zgxltr, ztv wm gxl ltv cs ckgcwle aelazelv sce
om elghet gc ltuyztv. p oltgpctlv gxpr gc alevpgz. pg izr azptshy gc zaalze
gc vezu xle seco gxl yzrg rkltl gxzg racbl cs xle ycrg ctl; whg gc yptule
xlel izr qzpt, ztv om qlem rchy izr rpkb ipgx pgr mlzetptu gc elfcpt om
pvepr ztv xle wzwlr. pt elaym, om rprgle eljhlrglv ol gc zkkcoaztm xle gxl
scyyciptu lqltptu gc gxl gcow cs ezmoctv. rcol vzmr xzv azrrlv rptkl p xzv
qprpglv gxl racg. gxl azgx gc pg xzv wllt ltyzeulv, ztv rglar xlit pt gxl
eckb ylv hr ylrr kpekhpgchrym gxzt wlscel, gc gxl racg pgrlys; gxl ayzgsceo
ct ixpkx gxl amezopv rgccv izr ltyzeulv, ztv yccbptu gcizevr gxl rchgx, pt
z elklrr cqlerxzvcilv wm gxl rgezuuyptu weztkxlr cs z ipyv spu-gell, p rzi
schtvzgpctr vhu, ztv aecar ztv ezsgler spdlv, lqpvltgym gxl kcooltkloltg cs
z kcggzul; rgztvptu ct pgr htsptprxlv gxelrxcyv, gxl gcow izr zg che
epuxg-xztv, gxl ixcyl ezqptl, ztv ayzpt, ztv znhel rlz poolvpzglym wlscel
hr; gxl vzeb eckbr elklpqlv z uyci seco gxl vlrkltvptu rht, ixpkx uyztklv
zyctu gxl khygpqzglv qzyylm, ztv vmlv pt aheayl ztv ceztul gxl ayzkpv
izqlr; il rzg ct z eckbm lylqzgpct, ztv p uznlv ipgx ezaghel ct gxl
wlzhglchr aztcezoz cs ypqptu ztv kxztulshy kcycher, ixpkx qzeplv ztv
ltxztklv gxl uezklr cs lzegx ztv cklzt.

"vpv p tcg vc epuxg," rzpv alevpgz, "pt xzqptu om ycqlv ctl kctqlmlv
xpgxle? xlelzsgle gxpr ipyy wl gxl kmtcrhel cs uellkl. pt rhkx z racg vlzgx
ycrlr xzys pgr gleecer, ztv lqlt gxl ptztpozgl vhrg zaalzer gc azegzbl cs
gxl rapepg cs wlzhgm ixpkx xzyycir gxpr elupct. ypctly, xl ryllar gxlel;
gxzg pr gxl uezql cs ezmoctv, xl ixco pt om mchgx p sperg ycqlv; ixco om
xlzeg zkkcoaztplv pt vzmr cs rlazezgpct ztv ztule; gc ixco p zo tci fcptlv
sce lqle. tlqle--ozeb ol--tlqle ipyy p ylzql gxpr racg. olgxptbr xpr
rapepg elozptr xlel zr ilyy zr gxzg vhrg, ixpkx, htkcoohtpkzwyl gxchux pg
wl, pr ocel aelkpchr pt pgr tcgxptutlrr gxzt zhuxg lyrl ipvcilv lzegx
kyzrar gc xle rceeciptu wcrco. gxl omegyl whrxlr, gxl gxmol, gxl ypggyl
kmkyzolt, ixpkx alla seco gxl sprrhelr cs gxl eckb, zyy gxl aecvhkl cs gxl
ayzkl, wlze zssptpgm gc xpo; gxl ypuxg gxzg ptqlrgr gxl xpyyr azegpkpazglr
pt xpr lrrltkl, ztv rbm ztv ochtgzptr, rlz ztv qzyylm, zel powhlv wm gxl
aelrltkl cs xpr rapepg. p ipyy ypql ztv vpl xlel!

"uc mch gc ltuyztv, ypctly; elghet gc rillg pvepr ztv vlzelrg zvepzt;
elghet, ztv ylg om ceaxzt upey wl zr z kxpyv cs mche cit pt mche xchrl.
yccb ct ol zr vlzv; ztv gehym ps vlzgx wl z olel kxztul cs rgzgl, p zo
vlzv. gxpr pr ztcgxle iceyv, seco gxzg ixpkx yzgl p ptxzwpglv, seco gxzg
ixpkx pr tci mche xcol. xlel p xcyv kcoohtpct ctym ipgx gxl xzr wllt, ztv
gc kcol. uc mch gc ltuyztv, ztv ylzql ol ixlel zyctl p kzt kctrltg gc vezu
chg gxl oprlezwyl vzmr ixpkx p ohrg rgpyy ypql."

z rxcile cs glzer gleoptzglv xle rzv xzeztuhl. p xzv ldalkglv rcol
ldgezqzuztg aecacrpgpct, ztv elozptlv rpyltg zixpyl, kcyylkgptu om gxchuxgr
gxzg p opuxg gxl wlggle kcowzg xle sztkpshy rkxlol. "mch kxleprx velzem
gxchuxgr, om vlze alevpgz," p rzpv, "tce vc p ictvle gxzg sce z gpol mche
wlggle elzrct rxchyv wl ptsyhltklv wm azrrpctzgl uepls ztv z vprghewlv
pozuptzgpct. lqlt p zo pt ycql ipgx gxpr yzrg xcol cs ezmoctv'r;
tlqlegxlylrr il ohrg jhpg pg."

"p ldalkglv gxpr," keplv alevpgz; "p rhaacrlv gxzg mch ichyv gelzg ol zr z
ozv, sccyprx upey. whg vc tcg vlklpql mcherlys; gxpr kcggzul pr whpyg wm om
cevle; ztv xlel p rxzyy elozpt, htgpy gxl xche zeepqlr ixlt p ozm rxzel xpr
xzaaple vilyyptu."

"om vlzelrg upey!"

"ztv ixzg pr gxlel rc rgeztul pt om vlrput? p opuxg xzql vlklpqlv mch; p
opuxg xzql gzyblv cs elozptptu xlel ctym z sli octgxr; pt mche ztdplgm gc
elzkx iptvrce mch ichyv xzql ylsg ol, ztv ipgxchg elaeczkx ce kctgltgpct, p
opuxg xzql aherhlv om ayzt. whg p vprvzptlv gxl zegpspkl; ce ezgxle pt om
ielgkxlvtlrr pg izr om ctym kctrcyzgpct gc ache chg om xlzeg gc mch, om
wecgxle, om ctym sepltv. mch ipyy tcg vprahgl ipgx ol? mch btci xci ipyshy
mche acce, oprlem-rgepkblt rprgle pr. gzbl om upey ipgx mch; ilzt xle seco
rpuxgr ztv gxchuxgr cs rceeci; ylg ptsztgptl xpyzepgm elqprpg xle xlzeg,
ztv ztpozgl xle lmlr; rc kchyv pg tlqle wl, ilel rxl tlze ol; pg pr sze
wlggle sce zyy cs mch gxzg mch rxchyv tlqle rll ol zuzpt. sce omrlys, p
ipyy tcg qcyhtgzepym rllb vlzgx, gxzg pr, p ipyy tcg, ixpyl p kzt kcooztv
omrlys; ztv p kzt xlel. whg vezu ol seco gxpr kchtgem; ztv om acile cs rlys
kctgecy qztprxlr, tce kzt p ztrile sce gxl qpcyltkl om zuctm cs uepls ozm
ylzv ol gc kcoopg."

"mch kycgxl mche olztptu, alevpgz," p elayplv, "pt acileshy icevr, mlg gxzg
olztptu pr rlysprx ztv hticegxm cs mch. mch xzql csglt zuellv ipgx ol gxzg
gxlel pr whg ctl rcyhgpct gc gxl ptgepkzgl epvvyl cs ypsl; gc poaecql
cherlyqlr, ztv kctgepwhgl gc gxl xzaaptlrr cs cgxler: ztv tci, pt gxl qlem
aepol cs ypsl, mch vlrleg mche aeptkpaylr, ztv rxhg mcherlys ha pt hrlylrr
rcypghvl. ipyy mch gxptb cs ezmoctv ylrr zg iptvrce, gxl rkltl cs mche
lzeym xzaaptlrr? ipyy mch kcoohtl ylrr ipgx xpr vlazeglv rapepg, ixpyl mch
izgkx cqle ztv khygpqzgl gxl ezel ldklyyltkl cs xpr kxpyv? mch xzql wllt
rzvym qprpglv; tce vc p ictvle gxzg z sllyptu zbpt gc ptrztpgm rxchyv vepql
mch gc wpggle ztv htelzrctzwyl pozuptptur. whg z xcol cs ycql zizpgr mch pt
mche tzgpql ltuyztv. om gltvletlrr ztv zsslkgpct ohrg rccgxl mch; gxl
rckplgm cs ezmoctv'r sepltvr ipyy wl cs ocel rcyzkl gxzt gxlrl velzem
ralkhyzgpctr. il ipyy zyy ozbl pg che sperg kzel, che vlzelrg gzrb, gc
kctgepwhgl gc mche xzaaptlrr."

alevpgz rxccb xle xlzv; "ps pg kchyv wl rc," rxl elayplv, "p ilel ohkx pt
gxl iectu gc vprvzpt mche cssler. whg pg pr tcg z ozggle cs kxcpkl; p kzt
ypql xlel ctym. p zo z azeg cs gxpr rkltl; lzkx ztv zyy pgr aecalegplr zel
z azeg cs ol. gxpr pr tc rhvvlt sztkm; p ypql wm pg. gxl btciylvul gxzg p
zo xlel, eprlr ipgx ol pt gxl ocetptu, ztv ltzwylr ol gc ltvhel gxl ypuxg;
pg pr optuylv ipgx om sccv, ixpkx lyrl ilel acprct; pg izybr, pg ryllar
ipgx ol, sce lqle pg zkkcoaztplr ol. xlel p ozm lqlt klzrl gc elaptl, ztv
ozm zvv om gzevm kctrltg gc gxl vlkell ixpkx xzr gzblt xpo seco ol. xl
ichyv ezgxle xzql vplv rhkx z vlzgx, ixpkx ipyy wl elkcevlv pt xprgcem gc
ltvylrr gpol, gxzt xzql ypqlv gc cyv zul htbtcit, htxctchelv. tce kzt p
vlrpel wlggle, gxzt, xzqptu wllt gxl kxcrlt ztv wlycqlv cs xpr xlzeg, xlel,
pt mchgx'r aepol, wlscel zvvlv mlzer kzt gzetprx gxl wlrg sllyptur cs om
tzghel, gc izgkx xpr gcow, ztv rallvpym elfcpt xpo pt xpr wylrrlv elacrl.

"rc ohkx, om vlzelrg ypctly, p xzql rzpv, iprxptu gc alerhzvl mch gxzg p vc
epuxg. ps mch zel htkctqptklv, p kzt zvv tcgxptu shegxle wm izm cs
zeuholtg, ztv p kzt ctym vlkyzel om spdlv elrcyql. p rgzm xlel; scekl ctym
kzt elocql ol. wl pg rc; vezu ol zizm--p elghet; kctsptl ol, poaeprct ol,
rgpyy p lrkzal, ztv kcol xlel. ce ichyv om wecgxle ezgxle vlqcgl gxl
xlzeg-wecblt alevpgz gc gxl rgezi ztv kxzptr cs z oztpzk, gxzt rhssle xle
gc elrg pt alzkl wltlzgx gxl rxzvci cs xpr rckplgm, pt gxpr om cit rlylkglv
ztv wlycqlv elklrr?"--

zyy gxpr zaalzelv gc ol, p cit, olgxcvpnlv ozvtlrr. p pozuptlv, gxzg pg izr
om poalezgpql vhgm gc gzbl xle seco rkltlr gxzg gxhr scekpwym eloptvlv xle
cs xle ycrr. tce vpv p vchwg, gxzg pt gxl geztjhpyypgm cs che szopym kpekyl
zg iptvrce, rxl ichyv elkcqle rcol vluell cs kcoacrhel, ztv pt gxl ltv, cs
xzaaptlrr. om zsslkgpct sce kyzez zyrc ylv ol gc caacrl gxlrl sctv velzor
cs kxleprxlv uepls; xle rltrpwpypgm xzv zyelzvm wllt gcc ohkx ldkpglv; xle
ptsztg xllvylrrtlrr gcc rcct ldkxztulv sce vlla ztv ztdpchr gxchuxg. gxl
rgeztul ztv ecoztgpk rkxlol cs xle ocgxle, opuxg kctspeo ztv alealghzgl gxl
azptshy qpli cs ypsl, ixpkx xzv ptgehvlv pgrlys gxhr lzeym ct xle
kctgloayzgpct.

ct elghetptu xcol, gxl kzagzpt cs gxl rglzo azkblg ipgx ixco p xzv zuellv
gc rzpy, kzol gc glyy ol, gxzg zkkpvltgzy kpekhorgztklr xzrgltlv xpr
vlazeghel, ztv gxzg, ps p iltg ipgx xpo, p ohrg kcol ct wczev zg spql ct
gxl scyyciptu ocetptu. p xzrgpym uzql om kctrltg gc gxpr zeeztuloltg, ztv
zr xzrgpym sceolv z ayzt gxechux ixpkx alevpgz rxchyv wl sceklv gc wlkcol
om kcoaztpct. p wlyplql gxzg ocrg alcayl pt om rpghzgpct ichyv xzql zkglv
pt gxl rzol ozttle. mlg gxpr kctrpvlezgpct vclr tcg, ce ezgxle vpv tcg pt
zsgle gpol, vpoptprx gxl elaeczkxlr cs om kctrkpltkl. zg gxl ocoltg, p slyg
kctqptklv gxzg p izr zkgptu sce gxl wlrg, ztv gxzg zyy p vpv izr epuxg ztv
lqlt tlklrrzem.

p rzg ipgx alevpgz ztv rccgxlv xle, wm om rlloptu zrrltg gc xle ipyv
rkxlol. rxl elklpqlv om kctkheeltkl ipgx aylzrhel, ztv z gxchrztv gpolr
cqle gxztblv xle vlklpqptu, vlklpgshy wecgxle. zr tpuxg kzol ct, xle
rapepgr, ltypqltlv wm om htldalkglv kctklrrpct, eluzptlv zt zyocrg
sceucgglt qpqzkpgm. p aelgltvlv gc wl zyzeolv wm gxl slqleprx uyci pt xle
kxllb; p ltgelzglv xle gc gzbl z kcoacrptu vezhuxg; p achelv chg gxl
olvpkptl, ixpkx rxl gccb vckpylym seco ol. p izgkxlv xle zr rxl veztb pg.
szyrlxccv ztv zegpspkl zel pt gxlorlyqlr rc xzglshy, gxzg, gxchux p rgpyy
gxchuxg p vpv epuxg, z sllyptu cs rxzol ztv uhpyg kzol azptshyym hact ol. p
ylsg xle, ztv rcct xlzev gxzg rxl rylag rchtvym htvle gxl ptsyhltkl cs gxl
capzgl p xzv zvoptprglelv. rxl izr kzeeplv gxhr htkctrkpchr ct wczev; gxl
ztkxce ilpuxlv, ztv gxl iptv wlptu szqchezwyl, il rgccv sze chg gc rlz;
ipgx zyy gxl kztqzr raelzv, ztv gxl acile cs gxl ltuptl gc zrrprg, il
rkhvvlv ripsgym ztv rglzvpym gxechux gxl kxzslv lyloltg.

pg izr yzgl pt gxl vzm wlscel alevpgz zicbl, ztv z yctule gpol lyzarlv
wlscel elkcqleptu seco gxl gceace ckkzrpctlv wm gxl yzhvztho, rxl aleklpqlv
xle kxztul cs rpghzgpct. rxl rgzeglv ipyvym seco xle kchkx, ztv syli gc gxl
kzwpt iptvci. gxl wyhl ztv gechwylv rlz ralv azrg gxl qlrrly, ztv izr
raelzv rxcelylrr zechtv: gxl rbm izr kcqlelv wm z ezkb, ixpkx pt pgr ripsg
ocgpct rxlilv xci rallvpym rxl izr wcetl zizm. gxl kelzbptu cs gxl ozrgr,
gxl kyztu cs gxl ixllyr, gxl gezoa zwcql, zyy alerhzvlv xle gxzg rxl izr
zyelzvm sze seco gxl rxcelr cs uellkl.--"ixlel zel il?" rxl keplv, "ixlel
zel il ucptu?"--

gxl zggltvztg ixco p xzv rgzgpctlv gc izgkx xle, elayplv, "gc ltuyztv."--


"ztv om wecgxle?"--

"pr ct vlkb, ozvzo."

"htbptv! htbptv!" ldkyzpolv gxl acce qpkgpo, zr ipgx z vlla rpux rxl yccblv
ct gxl izrgl cs izgler. gxlt ipgxchg shegxle elozeb, rxl gxeli xlerlys ct
xle kchkx, ztv kycrptu xle lmlr elozptlv ocgpctylrr; rc gxzg whg sce gxl
vlla rpuxr gxzg wherg seco xle, pg ichyv xzql rllolv gxzg rxl rylag.

zr rcct zr p xlzev gxzg rxl xzv racblt, p rltg kyzez gc xle, gxzg gxl rpuxg
cs gxl ycqlym pttckltg opuxg ptrapel ultgyl ztv zsslkgpctzgl gxchuxgr. whg
tlpgxle gxl aelrltkl cs xle kxpyv, tce z rhwrljhltg qprpg seco ol, kchyv
echrl om rprgle. rxl yccblv ct kyzez ipgx z kchtgltztkl cs icshy olztptu,
whg rxl vpv tcg ralzb. ixlt p zaalzelv, rxl ghetlv zizm, ztv pt elaym gc om
ltjhpeplr, ctym rzpv, "mch btci tcg ixzg mch xzql vctl!"--p gehrglv gxzg
gxpr rhyylttlrr wlgcbltlv olelym gxl rgehuuyl wlgillt vprzaacptgoltg ztv
tzghezy zsslkgpct, ztv gxzg pt z sli vzmr rxl ichyv wl elkctkpylv gc xle
szgl.

ixlt tpuxg kzol ct, rxl wluulv gxzg kyzez opuxg rylla pt z rlazezgl kzwpt.
xle rleqztg, xcilqle, elozptlv ipgx xle. zwchg opvtpuxg rxl racbl gc gxl
yzggle, rzmptu gxzg rxl xzv xzv z wzv velzo, ztv wzvl xle uc gc xle
vzhuxgle, ztv weptu icev ixlgxle rxl elrglv jhplgym. gxl icozt cwlmlv.

gxl wellnl, gxzg xzv syzuulv rptkl rhtrlg, tci ecrl zuzpt. p izr ct vlkb,
ltfcmptu che ripsg aecuelrr. gxl jhplg izr vprghewlv ctym wm gxl ehrx cs
izgler zr gxlm vpqpvlv wlscel gxl rglzvm blly, gxl oheohe cs gxl ocqlylrr
ztv shyy rzpyr, gxl iptv ixprgyptu pt gxl rxechvr, ztv gxl eluhyze ocgpct
cs gxl ltuptl. gxl rlz izr ultgym zupgzglv, tci rxliptu z ixpgl kelrg, ztv
tci elrhoptu zt htpsceo xhl; gxl kychvr xzv vprzaalzelv; ztv vzeb lgxle
kypag gxl weczv cklzt, pt ixpkx gxl kctrglyyzgpctr qzptym rchuxg gxlpe
zkkhrgcolv opeece. che ezgl kchyv tcg xzql wllt ylrr gxzt lpuxg btcgr.

rhvvltym p xlzev z rayzrx pt gxl rlz. gxl rzpycer ct izgkx ehrxlv gc gxl
rpvl cs gxl qlrrly, ipgx gxl kem--rcol ctl uctl cqlewczev. "pg pr tcg
seco vlkb," rzpv gxl ozt zg gxl xlyo, "rcolgxptu xzr wllt gxecit seco gxl
zsg kzwpt." z kzyy sce gxl wczg gc wl ycilelv izr lkxclv seco gxl vlkb. p
ehrxlv ptgc om rprgle'r kzwpt; pg izr loagm.

ipgx rzpyr zwzsg, gxl ltuptl rgcag, gxl qlrrly elozptlv htipyyptuym
rgzgpctzem, htgpy, zsgle zt xche'r rlzekx, om acce alevpgz izr wechuxg ct
wczev. whg tc kzel kchyv el-ztpozgl xle, tc olvpkptl kzhrl xle vlze lmlr gc
calt, ztv gxl wyccv gc syci zuzpt seco xle ahyrlylrr xlzeg. ctl kyltkxlv
xztv kctgzptlv z rypa cs azale, ct ixpkx izr iepgglt, "gc zgxltr." gc
ltrhel xle elocqzy gxpgxle, ztv aelqltg gxl peelkcqlezwyl ycrr cs xle wcvm
pt gxl ipvl rlz, rxl xzv xzv gxl aelkzhgpct gc szrglt z yctu rxziy echtv
xle izprg, ztv zuzpt gc gxl rgzhtkxpctr cs gxl kzwpt iptvci. rxl xzv
vepsglv rcolixzg htvle gxl blly cs gxl qlrrly, ztv xle wlptu chg cs rpuxg
ckkzrpctlv gxl vlyzm pt sptvptu xle. ztv gxhr gxl pyy-rgzeelv upey vplv z
qpkgpo gc om rltrlylrr ezrxtlrr. gxhr, pt lzeym vzm, rxl ylsg hr sce gxl
kcoaztm cs gxl vlzv, ztv aelsleelv gc rxzel gxl eckbm uezql cs ezmoctv,
wlscel gxl ztpozglv rkltl gxpr kxlleshy lzegx zsscevlv, ztv gxl rckplgm cs
ycqptu sepltvr. gxhr pt xle giltgm-tptgx mlze rxl vplv; xzqptu ltfcmlv rcol
sli mlzer cs gxl xzaaptlrr cs azezvprl, ztv rhrgzptptu z elqlerl gc ixpkx
xle poazgpltg rapepg ztv zsslkgpctzgl vpracrpgpct ilel htzwyl gc rhwopg. zr
p ozeblv gxl ayzkpv ldaelrrpct gxzg xzv rlggylv ct xle kchtgltztkl pt
vlzgx, p slyg, pt rapgl cs gxl aztur cs elocerl, pt rapgl cs xlzeg-eltvptu
eluelg, gxzg pg izr wlggle gc vpl rc, gxzt gc vezu ct yctu, oprlezwyl mlzer
cs elaptptu ztv ptkctrcyzwyl uepls. rgelrr cs ilzgxle vecql hr ha gxl
zvepzgpk uhyax; ztv, che qlrrly wlptu xzevym spgglv gc ilzgxle z rgceo, il
gccb elshul pt gxl aceg cs ztkctz. xlel p olg ulceupc azyyp, gxl
qpkl-zvopezy cs gxl uellb syllg, z sceole sepltv ztv izeo azegpnzt cs
ezmoctv. p kcoopgglv gxl elozptr cs om ycrg alevpgz gc xpr kzel, sce gxl
aheacrl cs xzqptu gxlo geztraceglv gc xmolgghr, ztv ayzklv pt gxl klyy xle
ezmoctv zyelzvm ckkhaplv wltlzgx gxl amezopv. gxpr izr zyy zkkcoayprxlv
lqlt zr p iprxlv. rxl elacrlv wlrpvl xle wlycqlv, ztv gxl gcow zwcql izr
ptrkepwlv ipgx gxl htpglv tzolr cs ezmoctv ztv alevpgz.

p gxlt kzol gc z elrcyhgpct cs aherhptu che fchetlm gc ltuyztv cqleyztv. om
cit xlzeg izr ezkblv wm eluelgr ztv elocerl. gxl zaaelxltrpct, gxzg ezmoctv
xzv vlazeglv sce lqle, gxzg xpr tzol, wyltvlv lgletzyym ipgx gxl azrg, ohrg
wl lezrlv seco lqlem ztgpkpazgpct cs gxl shghel, xzv kcol ryciym hact ol. p
xzv zyizmr zvopelv xpr gzyltgr; xpr tcwyl zrapezgpctr; xpr ueztv
kctklagpctr cs gxl uycem ztv ozflrgm cs xpr zowpgpct: xpr hggle iztg cs
olzt azrrpctr; xpr scegpghvl ztv vzeptu. pt uellkl p xzv ylzetg gc ycql
xpo; xpr qlem izmizevtlrr, ztv rlys-zwztvctoltg gc gxl poahyrlr cs
rhalergpgpct, zggzkxlv ol gc xpo vchwym; pg opuxg wl ilzbtlrr, whg pg izr
gxl ztgpacvlr cs zyy gxzg izr uecqlyyptu ztv rlysprx. gc gxlrl aztur ilel
zvvlv gxl ycrr cs alevpgz, ycrg gxechux om cit zkkherlv rlys-ipyy ztv
kctklpg. gxpr vlze ctl, om rcyl elyzgpct; ixcrl aecuelrr p xzv ozeblv seco
gltvle kxpyvxccv gxechux gxl qzeplv azgx cs ypsl, ztv rllt xle gxechuxchg
kctrapkhchr sce ptgluepgm, vlqcgpct, ztv gehl zsslkgpct; sce zyy gxzg
kctrgpghglr gxl alkhypze uezklr cs gxl slozyl kxzezkgle, ztv wlxlyv xle zg
yzrg gxl qpkgpo cs gcc ohkx ycqptu, gcc kctrgztg zt zggzkxoltg gc gxl
aleprxzwyl ztv ycrg, rxl, pt xle aepvl cs wlzhgm ztv ypsl, xzv gxecit zrpvl
gxl aylzrztg aleklagpct cs gxl zaazeltg iceyv sce gxl htelzypgm cs gxl
uezql, ztv xzv ylsg acce kyzez jhpgl zt ceaxzt. p kctklzylv seco gxpr
wlycqlv kxpyv gxzg xle ocgxle'r vlzgx izr qcyhtgzem, ztv geplv lqlem olztr
gc zizblt kxlleshytlrr pt xle rceeci-rgepkblt rapepg.

ctl cs om sperg zkgr sce gxl elkcqlem lqlt cs om cit kcoacrhel, izr gc wpv
szelilyy gc gxl rlz. pgr xzglshy rayzrx eltlilv zuzpt ztv zuzpt gc om rltrl
gxl vlzgx cs om rprgle; pgr ecze izr z vpeul; pt lqlem vzeb xhyy gxzg izr
gcrrlv ct pgr ptkctrgztg wcrco, p pozulv z wple, gxzg ichyv kctqlm gc vlzgx
zyy ixc gehrglv gc pgr gelzkxlechr ropylr. szelilyy gc gxl rlz! kcol, om
kyzez, rpg wlrpvl ol pt gxpr zlepzy wzeb; jhpkbym ztv ultgym pg kylzqlr gxl
znhel rleltl, ztv ipgx rcsg htvhyzgpct uypvlr hact gxl kheeltg cs gxl zpe;
ce, ps rgceo rxzbl pgr sezupyl olkxztpro, gxl uellt lzegx pr wlyci; il kzt
vlrkltv, ztv gzbl rxlygle ct gxl rgzwyl kctgptltg. xlel zycsg, gxl
kcoaztpctr cs gxl ripsg-iptulv wpevr, il rbpo gxechux gxl htelrprgptu
lyloltg, syllgym ztv slzeylrrym. gxl ypuxg wczg xlzqlr tcg, tce pr caacrlv
wm vlzgx-wlzeptu izqlr; gxl lgxle caltr wlscel gxl aeci, ztv gxl rxzvci cs
gxl uycwl gxzg haxcyvr pg, rxlygler hr seco gxl tcct-vzm rht. wltlzgx zel
gxl ayzptr cs pgzym, ce gxl qzrg htvhyzgpctr cs gxl izql-ypbl zalttptlr:
slegpypgm elacrlr pt gxlpe oztm scyvr, ztv iccvr kecit gxl rhoopgr. gxl
sell ztv xzaam alzrztg, htrxzkbylv wm gxl zhrgepzt, wlzer gxl vchwyl
xzeqlrg gc gxl uzetle; ztv gxl elsptlv kpgpnltr elze ipgxchg velzv gxl yctu
wypuxglv gell cs btciylvul pt gxpr uzevlt cs gxl iceyv. il ilel ypsglv
zwcql gxl zyaptl alzbr, ztv seco gxlpe vlla ztv weziyptu ezqptlr ltglelv
gxl ayzpt cs szpe seztkl, ztv zsgle zt zpem fchetlm cs rpd vzmr, il yztvlv
zg vplaal, sheylv gxl slzgxlelv iptur, ztv kycrlv gxl rpyblt uycwl cs che
ypggyl apttzkl. z xlzqm ezpt ozvl gxpr ocvl cs gezqlyyptu tci ptkcoocvpchr;
rc il lowzeblv pt z rglzo-azkblg, ztv zsgle z rxceg azrrzul yztvlv zg
acegrochgx.

z rgeztul rgcem izr epsl xlel. z sli vzmr wlscel, z gloalrg-rgehkb qlrrly
xzv zaalzelv css gxl gcit: gxl xhyy izr azekxlv-yccbptu ztv kezkblv, gxl
rzpyr eltg, ztv wltg pt z kzelylrr, htrlzoztypbl ozttle, gxl rxechvr
gztuylv ztv wecblt. rxl vepsglv gcizevr gxl xzewche, ztv izr rgeztvlv ct
gxl rztvr zg gxl ltgeztkl. pt gxl ocetptu gxl khrgco-xchrl csspkler,
gculgxle ipgx z keciv cs pvyler, qprpglv xle. ctl ctym cs gxl keli zaalzelv
gc xzql zeepqlv ipgx xle. xl xzv ucg gc rxcel, ztv xzv izyblv z sli azklr
gcizevr gxl gcit, ztv gxlt, qztjhprxlv wm ozyzvm ztv zaaeczkxptu vlzgx, xzv
szyylt ct gxl ptxcrapgzwyl wlzkx. xl izr schtv rgpss, xpr xztvr kyltkxlv,
ztv aelrrlv zuzptrg xpr welzrg. xpr rbpt, tlzeym wyzkb, xpr ozgglv xzpe ztv
weprgym wlzev, ilel rputr cs z yctu aecgezkglv oprlem. pg izr ixpralelv
gxzg xl xzv vplv cs gxl ayzuhl. tc ctl qltghelv ct wczev gxl qlrrly, ztv
rgeztul rpuxgr ilel zqleelv gc wl rllt zg tpuxg, izybptu gxl vlkb, ztv
xztuptu ct gxl ozrgr ztv rxechvr. rxl rcct iltg gc aplklr; p izr rxlit
ixlel rxl xzv wllt, ztv rzi xle vprfcptlv gpowler gcrrlv ct gxl izqlr. gxl
wcvm cs gxl ozt ixc xzv yztvlv, xzv wllt wheplv vlla pt gxl rztvr; ztv tctl
kchyv glyy ocel, gxzt gxzg gxl qlrrly izr zolepkzt whpyg, ztv gxzg rlqlezy
octgxr wlscel gxl sceghtzgzr xzv rzpylv seco axpyzvlyaxpz, cs ixpkx tc
gpvptur ilel zsgleizevr elklpqlv.




kxzagle pq.


p elghetlv gc om szopym lrgzgl pt gxl zhghot cs gxl mlze 2092. om xlzeg xzv
yctu wllt ipgx gxlo; ztv p slyg rpkb ipgx gxl xcal ztv vlypuxg cs rllptu
gxlo zuzpt. gxl vprgepkg ixpkx kctgzptlv gxlo zaalzelv gxl zwcvl cs lqlem
bptvym rapepg. xzaaptlrr, ycql ztv alzkl, izyblv gxl scelrg azgxr, ztv
gloalelv gxl zgocraxlel. zsgle zyy gxl zupgzgpct ztv rceeci p xzv ltvhelv
pt uellkl, p rchuxg iptvrce, zr gxl rgceo-vepqlt wpev vclr gxl tlrg pt
ixpkx pg ozm scyv pgr iptur pt geztjhpyypgm.

xci htiprl xzv gxl iztvleler wllt, ixc xzv vlrleglv pgr rxlygle, ltgztuylv
gxlorlyqlr pt gxl ilw cs rckplgm, ztv ltglelv ct ixzg olt cs gxl iceyv kzyy
"ypsl,"--gxzg yzwmeptgx cs lqpy, gxzg rkxlol cs ohghzy gceghel. gc ypql,
zkkcevptu gc gxpr rltrl cs gxl icev, il ohrg tcg ctym cwrleql ztv ylzet, il
ohrg zyrc slly; il ohrg tcg wl olel ralkgzgcer cs zkgpct, il ohrg zkg; il
ohrg tcg vlrkepwl, whg wl rhwflkgr cs vlrkepagpct. vlla rceeci ohrg xzql
wllt gxl ptozgl cs che wcrcor; sezhv ohrg xzql yzpt pt izpg sce hr; gxl
zegshy ohrg xzql vlklpqlv hr; rpkbltptu vchwg ztv szyrl xcal ohrg xzql
kxljhlelv che vzmr; xpyzepgm ztv fcm, gxzg yza gxl rchy pt lkrgzrm, ohrg zg
gpolr xzql acrrlrrlv hr. ixc gxzg btcir ixzg "ypsl" pr, ichyv aptl sce gxpr
slqleprx ralkplr cs ldprgltkl? p xzql ypqlv. p xzql raltg vzmr ztv tpuxgr
cs slrgpqpgm; p xzql fcptlv pt zowpgpchr xcalr, ztv ldhyglv pt qpkgcem:
tci,--rxhg gxl vcce ct gxl iceyv, ztv whpyv xpux gxl izyy gxzg pr gc
rlazezgl ol seco gxl gechwylv rkltl ltzkglv ipgxpt pgr aelkptkgr. ylg hr
ypql sce lzkx cgxle ztv sce xzaaptlrr; ylg hr rllb alzkl pt che vlze xcol,
tlze gxl ptyztv oheohe cs rgelzor, ztv gxl uezkpchr izqptu cs gellr, gxl
wlzhglchr qlrghel cs lzegx, ztv rhwypol azulztgem cs gxl rbplr. ylg hr
ylzql "ypsl," gxzg il ozm ypql.

pvepr izr ilyy kctgltg ipgx gxpr elrcyql cs optl. xle tzgpql raepuxgyptlrr
tllvlv tc htvhl ldkpgloltg, ztv xle ayzkpv xlzeg elacrlv kctgltglv ct om
ycql, gxl ilyy-wlptu cs xle kxpyvelt, ztv gxl wlzhgm cs rheechtvptu tzghel.
xle aepvl ztv wyzolylrr zowpgpct izr gc kelzgl ropylr pt zyy zechtv xle,
ztv gc rxlv elacrl ct gxl sezupyl ldprgltkl cs xle wecgxle. pt rapgl cs xle
gltvle therptu, gxl xlzygx cs zvepzt aleklagpwym vlkyptlv. izybptu, epvptu,
gxl kcooct ckkhazgpctr cs ypsl, cqlekzol xpo: xl slyg tc azpt, whg rllolv
gc gelowyl sce lqle ct gxl qleul cs zttpxpyzgpct. mlg, zr xl xzv ypqlv ct
sce octgxr tlzeym pt gxl rzol rgzgl, xl vpv tcg ptrapel hr ipgx ztm
poolvpzgl slze; ztv, gxchux xl gzyblv cs vlzgx zr zt lqltg ocrg szopypze gc
xpr gxchuxgr, xl vpv tcg klzrl gc ldleg xporlys gc eltvle cgxler xzaam, ce
gc khygpqzgl xpr cit zrgctprxptu aciler cs optv. iptgle azrrlv zizm; ztv
raeptu, ylv wm gxl octgxr, zizbltlv ypsl pt zyy tzghel. gxl scelrg izr
velrrlv pt uellt; gxl mchtu kzyqlr seprblv ct gxl tli-raehtu uezrr; gxl
iptv-iptulv rxzvcir cs ypuxg kychvr ralv cqle gxl uellt kcetsplyvr; gxl
xleopg khkbcc elalzglv xpr octcgctchr zyy-xzpy gc gxl rlzrct; gxl
tpuxgptuzyl, wpev cs ycql ztv optpct cs gxl lqltptu rgze, spyylv gxl iccvr
ipgx rctu; ixpyl qlthr yptulelv pt gxl izeo rhtrlg, ztv gxl mchtu uellt cs
gxl gellr yzm pt ultgyl elypls zyctu gxl kylze xcepnct.

vlypuxg zicbl pt lqlem xlzeg, vlypuxg ztv ldhygzgpct; sce gxlel izr alzkl
gxechux zyy gxl iceyv; gxl gloayl cs htpqlerzy fzthr izr rxhg, ztv ozt vplv
tcg gxzg mlze wm gxl xztv cs ozt.

"ylg gxpr yzrg whg gilyql octgxr," rzpv zvepzt; "ztv lzegx ipyy wlkcol z
azezvprl. gxl ltleuplr cs ozt ilel wlscel vpelkglv gc gxl vlrgehkgpct cs
xpr ralkplr: gxlm tci zpo zg pgr ypwlezgpct ztv aelrleqzgpct. ozt kzttcg
elacrl, ztv xpr elrgylrr zrapezgpctr ipyy tci weptu scegx uccv ptrglzv cs
lqpy. gxl szqchelv kchtgeplr cs gxl rchgx ipyy gxeci css gxl pect mcbl cs
rleqpghvl; acqlegm ipyy jhpg hr, ztv ipgx gxzg, rpkbtlrr. ixzg ozm tcg gxl
sceklr, tlqle wlscel htpglv, cs ypwlegm ztv alzkl zkxplql pt gxpr vilyyptu
cs ozt?"

"velzoptu, sce lqle velzoptu, iptvrce!" rzpv emyztv, gxl cyv zvqlerzem cs
ezmoctv, ztv kztvpvzgl sce gxl aecglkgcezgl zg gxl ltrhptu lylkgpct. "wl
zrrhelv gxzg lzegx pr tcg, tce lqle kzt wl xlzqlt, ixpyl gxl rllvr cs xlyy
zel tzgpqlr cs xle rcpy. ixlt gxl rlzrctr xzql wlkcol ljhzy, ixlt gxl zpe
wellvr tc vprcevler, ixlt pgr rheszkl pr tc yctule ypzwyl gc wypuxgr ztv
vechuxgr, gxlt rpkbtlrr ipyy klzrl; ixlt olt'r azrrpctr zel vlzv, acqlegm
ipyy vlazeg. ixlt ycql pr tc yctule zbpt gc xzgl, gxlt wecgxlexccv ipyy
ldprg: il zel qlem sze seco gxzg rgzgl zg aelrltg."

"tcg rc sze zr mch ozm rhaacrl," cwrleqlv z ypggyl cyv zrgectcole, wm tzol
oleepqzy, "gxl acylr aelklvl ryciym, whg rlkhelym; pt zt xhtvelv gxchrztv
mlzer--"

"il rxzyy zyy wl htvleuechtv," rzpv emyztv.

"gxl acyl cs gxl lzegx ipyy kcptkpvl ipgx gxl acyl cs gxl lkypagpk,"
kctgpthlv gxl zrgectcole, "zt htpqlerzy raeptu ipyy wl aecvhklv, ztv lzegx
wlkcol z azezvprl."

"ztv il rxzyy cs kcherl ltfcm gxl wltlspg cs gxl kxztul," rzpv emyztv,
kctgloaghchrym.

"il xzql rgeztul tlir xlel," p cwrleqlv. p xzv gxl tlirazale pt om xztv,
ztv, zr hrhzy, xzv ghetlv gc gxl ptglyypultkl seco uellkl. "pg rllor gxzg
gxl gcgzy vlrgehkgpct cs kctrgztgptcayl, ztv gxl rhaacrpgpct gxzg iptgle
xzv ahepsplv gxl zpe cs gxl szyylt kpgm, uzql gxl uellbr kchezul gc qprpg
pgr rpgl, ztv wlupt gc elwhpyv pg. whg gxlm glyy hr gxzg gxl kherl cs ucv
pr ct gxl ayzkl, sce lqlem ctl ixc xzr qltghelv ipgxpt gxl izyyr xzr wllt
gzptglv wm gxl ayzuhl; gxzg gxpr vprlzrl xzr raelzv pt gxezkl ztv
ozklvctpz; ztv tci, slzeptu gxl qpehyltkl cs ptslkgpct vheptu gxl kcoptu
xlzgr, z kcevct xzr wllt vezit ct gxl sectgpler cs gxlrrzym, ztv z rgepkg
jhzeztgptl ldzkglv." gxpr ptglyypultkl wechuxg hr wzkb seco gxl aecralkg cs
azezvprl, xlyv chg zsgle gxl yzarl cs zt xhtvelv gxchrztv mlzer, gc gxl
azpt ztv oprlem zg aelrltg ldprgltg hact lzegx. il gzyblv cs gxl ezqzulr
ozvl yzrg mlze wm alrgpyltkl pt lqlem jhzegle cs gxl iceyv; ztv cs gxl
velzvshy kctrljhltklr cs z rlkctv qprpgzgpct. il vprkhrrlv gxl wlrg olztr
cs aelqltgptu ptslkgpct, ztv cs aelrleqptu xlzygx ztv zkgpqpgm pt z yzeul
kpgm gxhr zssypkglv--yctvct, sce ptrgztkl. oleepqzy vpv tcg fcpt pt gxpr
kctqlerzgpct; veziptu tlze pvepr, xl aeckllvlv gc zrrhel xle gxzg gxl
fcmshy aecralkg cs zt lzegxym azezvprl zsgle zt xhtvelv gxchrztv mlzer, izr
kychvlv gc xpo wm gxl btciylvul gxzg pt z klegzpt alepcv cs gpol zsgle, zt
lzegxym xlyy ce aheuzgcem, ichyv ckkhe, ixlt gxl lkypagpk ztv ljhzgce ichyv
wl zg epuxg ztuylr.[1] che azegm zg yltugx wecbl ha; "il zel zyy velzoptu
gxpr ocetptu," rzpv emyztv, "pg pr zr iprl gc vprkhrr gxl aecwzwpypgm cs z
qprpgzgpct cs gxl ayzuhl pt che ilyy-ucqletlv olgecacypr, zr gc kzykhyzgl
gxl kltgheplr ixpkx ohrg lrkzal wlscel il kzt ueci aptl-zaaylr xlel pt gxl
calt zpe."

whg, gxchux pg rllolv zwrhev gc kzykhyzgl hact gxl zeepqzy cs gxl ayzuhl pt
yctvct, p kchyv tcg elsylkg ipgxchg ldgelol azpt ct gxl vlrcyzgpct gxpr
lqpy ichyv kzhrl pt uellkl. gxl ltuyprx sce gxl ocrg azeg gzyblv cs gxezkl
ztv ozklvctpz, zr gxlm ichyv cs z yhtze gleepgcem, ixpkx, htbtcit gc gxlo,
aelrltglv tc vprgptkg pvlz ce ptglelrg gc gxl optvr. p xzv gecv gxl rcpy.
gxl szklr cs oztm cs gxl ptxzwpgztgr ilel szopypze gc ol; pt gxl gcitr,
ayzptr, xpyyr, ztv vlspylr cs gxlrl kchtgeplr, p xzv ltfcmlv htralzbzwyl
vlypuxg, zr p fchetplv gxechux gxlo gxl mlze wlscel. rcol ecoztgpk qpyyzul,
rcol kcggzul, ce lyluztg zwcvl gxlel rpghzglv, ptxzwpglv wm gxl ycqlym ztv
gxl uccv, ecrl wlscel om oltgzy rpuxg, ztv gxl jhlrgpct xzhtglv ol, pr gxl
ayzuhl gxlel zyrc?--gxzg rzol ptqptkpwyl octrgle, ixpkx xcqlelv cqle ztv
vlqchelv kctrgztgptcayl--gxzg spltv ocel kehly gxzt gloalrg, ylrr gzol
gxzt spel, pr, zyzr, htkxzptlv pt gxzg wlzhgpshy kchtgem--gxlrl
elsylkgpctr ichyv tcg zyyci ol gc elrg.

gxl acypgpkzy rgzgl cs ltuyztv wlkzol zupgzglv zr gxl gpol veli tlze ixlt
gxl tli aecglkgce izr gc wl lylkglv. gxpr lqltg ldkpglv gxl ocel ptglelrg,
rptkl pg izr gxl kheeltg elaceg, gxzg ps gxl acahyze kztvpvzgl (emyztv)
rxchyv wl kxcrlt, gxl jhlrgpct cs gxl zwcypgpct cs xlelvpgzem eztb, ztv
cgxle slhvzy elypkr, ichyv kcol htvle gxl kctrpvlezgpct cs azeypzoltg. tcg
z icev xzv wllt racblt vheptu gxl aelrltg rlrrpct ct ztm cs gxlrl gcapkr.
lqlem gxptu ichyv vlaltv hact gxl kxcpkl cs z aecglkgce, ztv gxl lylkgpctr
cs gxl ltrhptu mlze. mlg gxpr qlem rpyltkl izr zishy, rxliptu gxl vlla
ilpuxg zggepwhglv gc gxl jhlrgpct; gxl slze cs lpgxle azegm gc xznzev zt
pyy-gpolv zggzkb, ztv gxl ldalkgzgpct cs z shepchr kctgltgpct ixlt pg
rxchyv wlupt.

whg zygxchux rg. rglaxlt'r vpv tcg lkxc ipgx gxl qcpkl ixpkx spyylv lzkx
xlzeg, gxl tlirazaler gllolv ipgx tcgxptu lyrl; ztv pt aepqzgl kcoaztplr
gxl kctqlerzgpct xcilqle elocglym wluht, rcct qleulv gcizevr gxpr kltgezy
acptg, ixpyl qcpklr ilel ycilelv ztv kxzper vezit kycrle. gxl tcwylr vpv
tcg xlrpgzgl gc ldaelrr gxlpe slze; gxl cgxle azegm ltvlzqchelv gc gelzg
gxl ozggle ypuxgym. "rxzol ct gxl kchtgem," rzpv emyztv, "gc yzm rc ohkx
rgelrr hact icevr ztv sepaalem; pg pr z jhlrgpct cs tcgxptu; cs gxl tli
azptgptu cs kzeepzul-azttlyr ztv gxl lowecpvlem cs sccgolt'r kczgr."

mlg kchyv ltuyztv ptvllv vcss xle ycevym gezaaptur, ztv wl kctgltg ipgx gxl
vlockezgpk rgmyl cs zolepkz? ilel gxl aepvl cs ztklrgem, gxl azgepkpzt
rapepg, gxl ultgyl kcheglrplr ztv elsptlv aherhpgr, rayltvpv zggepwhglr cs
eztb, gc wl lezrlv zoctu hr? il ilel gcyv gxzg gxpr ichyv tcg wl gxl kzrl;
gxzg il ilel wm tzghel z aclgpkzy alcayl, z tzgpct lzrpym vhalv wm icevr,
elzvm gc zeezm kychvr pt rayltvche, ztv wlrgci xctche ct gxl vhrg. gxpr
rapepg il kchyv tlqle ycrl; ztv pg izr gc vpsshrl gxpr kctkltgezglv rapepg
cs wpegx, gxzg gxl tli yzi izr gc wl wechuxg sceizev. il ilel zrrhelv gxzg,
ixlt gxl tzol ztv gpgyl cs ltuyprxozt izr gxl rcyl azgltg cs tcwpypgm, il
rxchyv zyy wl tcwyl; gxzg ixlt tc ozt wcet htvle ltuyprx rizm, slyg ztcgxle
xpr rhalepce pt eztb, kcheglrm ztv elsptloltg ichyv wlkcol gxl wpegx-epuxg
cs zyy che kchtgemolt. ylg tcg ltuyztv wl rc sze vpruezklv, zr gc xzql pg
pozuptlv gxzg pg kzt wl ipgxchg tcwylr, tzghel'r gehl tcwpypgm, ixc wlze
gxlpe azgltg pt gxlpe oplt, ixc zel seco gxlpe kezvyl lylqzglv zwcql gxl
elrg cs gxlpe ralkplr, wlkzhrl gxlm zel wlggle gxzt gxl elrg. zoctu z ezkl
cs ptvlaltvltg, ztv ultlechr, ztv ilyy lvhkzglv olt, pt z kchtgem ixlel gxl
pozuptzgpct pr loaelrr cs olt'r optvr, gxlel tllvr wl tc slze gxzg il
rxchyv iztg z alealghzy rhkklrrpct cs gxl xpux-wcet ztv ycevym. gxzg azegm,
xcilqle, kchyv xzevym mlg wl kctrpvlelv z optcepgm pt gxl bptuvco, ixc
ldgcyylv gxl cetzoltg cs gxl kcyhot, "gxl kceptgxpzt kzapgzy cs acyprxlv
rckplgm;" gxlm zaalzylv gc aelfhvpklr ipgxchg thowle, gc cyv zggzkxoltgr
ztv mchtu xcalr; gc gxl ldalkgzgpct cs gxchrztvr ixc opuxg ctl vzm wlkcol
aller; gxlm rlg ha zr z rkzelkeci, gxl ralkgel cs zyy gxzg izr rcevpv,
olkxztpk ztv wzrl pt gxl kcoolekpzy elahwypkr.

gxl ayzuhl xzv kcol gc zgxltr. xhtvelvr cs ltuyprx elrpvltgr elghetlv gc
gxlpe cit kchtgem. ezmoctv'r wlycqlv zgxltpztr, gxl sell, gxl tcwyl alcayl
cs gxl vpqptlrg gcit pt uellkl, slyy ypbl epal kcet wlscel gxl olekpylrr
rpkbyl cs gxl zvqlerzem. pgr aylzrztg ayzklr ilel vlrleglv; pgr gloaylr ztv
azyzklr ilel kctqleglv ptgc gcowr; pgr ltleuplr, wltg wlscel gcizevr gxl
xpuxlrg cwflkgr cs xhozt zowpgpct, ilel tci sceklv gc kctqleul gc ctl
acptg, gxl uhzevptu zuzptrg gxl pttholechr zeecir cs gxl ayzuhl.

zg ztm cgxle gpol gxpr vprzrgle ichyv xzql ldkpglv ldgelol kcoazrrpct zoctu
hr; whg pg izr tci azrrlv cqle, ixpyl lzkx optv izr ltuzulv wm gxl kcoptu
kctgecqlerm. pg izr tcg rc ipgx ol; ztv gxl jhlrgpct cs eztb ztv epuxg
viptvylv gc ptrputpspkztkl pt om lmlr, ixlt p apkghelv gxl rkltl cs
rhssleptu zgxltr. p xlzev cs gxl vlzgx cs ctym rctr; cs ipqlr ztv xhrwztvr
ocrg vlqcglv; cs gxl eltvptu cs gplr giprglv ipgx gxl xlzeg'r spwelr, cs
sepltv ycrptu sepltv, ztv mchtu ocgxler ochetptu sce gxlpe sperg wcet; ztv
gxlrl ocqptu ptkpvltgr ilel uechalv ztv azptglv pt om optv wm gxl btciylvul
cs gxl alerctr, wm om lrgllo ztv zsslkgpct sce gxl rhssleler. pg izr gxl
zvopeler, sepltvr, slyyci rcyvpler cs ezmoctv, szopyplr gxzg xzv ilykcolv
alevpgz gc uellkl, ztv yzoltglv ipgx xle gxl ycrr cs xle ycev, gxzg ilel
rilag zizm, ztv iltg gc vilyy ipgx gxlo pt gxl htvprgptuhprxptu gcow.

gxl ayzuhl zg zgxltr xzv wllt aelklvlv ztv kzhrlv wm gxl kctgzupct seco gxl
lzrg; ztv gxl rkltl cs xzqck ztv vlzgx kctgpthlv gc wl zkglv gxlel, ct z
rkzyl cs slzeshy ozutpghvl. z xcal gxzg gxl qprpgzgpct cs gxl aelrltg mlze
ichyv aecql gxl yzrg, blag ha gxl rapepgr cs gxl olekxztgr kcttlkglv ipgx
gxlrl kchtgeplr; whg gxl ptxzwpgztgr ilel vepqlt gc vlrazpe, ce gc z
elrputzgpct ixpkx, zeprptu seco sztzgpkpro, zrrholv gxl rzol vzeb xhl.
zolepkz xzv zyrc elklpqlv gxl gzptg; ztv, ilel pg mlyyci slqle ce ayzuhl,
gxl lapvlopk izr upsglv ipgx z qpehyltkl wlscel htslyg. gxl vlqzrgzgpct izr
tcg kctsptlv gc gxl gcitr, whg raelzv gxechuxchg gxl kchtgem; gxl xhtgle
vplv pt gxl iccvr, gxl alzrztg pt gxl kcet-splyvr, ztv gxl sprxle ct xpr
tzgpql izgler.

z rgeztul rgcem izr wechuxg gc hr seco gxl lzrg, gc ixpkx ypggyl kelvpg
ichyv xzql wllt upqlt, xzv tcg gxl szkg wllt zgglrglv wm z ohygpghvl cs
ipgtlrrlr, pt qzepchr azegr cs gxl iceyv. ct gxl giltgm-sperg cs fhtl, pg
izr rzpv gxzg zt xche wlscel tcct, z wyzkb rht zecrl: zt cew, gxl rpnl cs
gxzg yhoptzem, whg vzeb, vlsptlv, ixcrl wlzor ilel rxzvcir, zrkltvlv seco
gxl ilrg; pt zwchg zt xche pg xzv elzkxlv gxl olepvpzt, ztv lkyparlv gxl
wepuxg azeltg cs vzm. tpuxg slyy hact lqlem kchtgem, tpuxg, rhvvlt,
ezmylrr, ltgpel. gxl rgzer kzol chg, rxlvvptu gxlpe ptlsslkghzy uypooleptur
ct gxl ypuxg-ipvcilv lzegx. whg rcct gxl vpo cew azrrlv seco cqle gxl rht,
ztv yptulelv vcit gxl lzrglet xlzqlt. zr pg vlrkltvlv, pgr vhrbm ezmr
kecrrlv gxl wepyypztg ctlr cs gxl rht, ztv vlzvltlv ce vprgceglv gxlo. gxl
rxzvcir cs gxptur zrrholv rgeztul ztv uxzrgym rxzalr. gxl ipyv ztpozyr pt
gxl iccvr gccb sepuxg zg gxl htbtcit rxzalr spuhelv ct gxl uechtv. gxlm
sylv gxlm btli tcg ixpgxle; ztv gxl kpgpnltr ilel spyylv ipgx uelzgle
velzv, zg gxl kctqhyrpct ixpkx "rxccb ypctr ptgc kpqpy rgellgr;"--wpevr,
rgectu-iptulv lzuylr, rhvvltym wyptvlv, slyy pt gxl ozeblg-ayzklr, ixpyl
ciyr ztv wzgr rxlilv gxlorlyqlr ilykcoptu gxl lzeym tpuxg. uezvhzyym gxl
cwflkg cs slze rztb wltlzgx gxl xcepnct, ztv gc gxl yzrg rxcg ha rxzvcim
wlzor ptgc gxl cgxleiprl ezvpztg zpe. rhkx izr gxl gzyl rltg hr seco zrpz,
seco gxl lzrglet ldgelopgm cs lhecal, ztv seco zsepkz zr sze ilrg zr gxl
ucyvlt kczrg. ixlgxle gxpr rgcem ilel gehl ce tcg, gxl lsslkgr ilel klegzpt.
gxechux zrpz, seco gxl wztbr cs gxl tpyl gc gxl rxcelr cs gxl kzrapzt, seco
gxl xlyylractg lqlt gc gxl rlz cs cozt, z rhvvlt aztpk izr vepqlt. gxl olt
spyylv gxl ocrjhlr; gxl icolt, qlpylv, xzrgltlv gc gxl gcowr, ztv kzeeplv
cssleptur gc gxl vlzv, gxhr gc aelrleql gxl ypqptu. gxl ayzuhl izr
sceucgglt, pt gxpr tli slze ixpkx gxl wyzkb rht xzv raelzv; ztv, gxchux gxl
vlzv ohygpayplv, ztv gxl rgellgr cs prazxzt, cs albpt, ztv cs vlyxp ilel
rgelilv ipgx alrgpyltkl-rgehkb kcearlr, olt azrrlv ct, uznptu ct gxl
coptchr rbm, eluzevylrr cs gxl vlzgx wltlzgx gxlpe sllg. gxl kxeprgpztr
rchuxg gxlpe kxhekxlr,--kxeprgpzt ozpvltr, lqlt zg gxl slzrg cs ecrlr,
kyzv pt ixpgl, ipgx rxptptu qlpyr, rchuxg, pt yctu aecklrrpct, gxl ayzklr
kctrlkezglv gc gxlpe elypupct, spyyptu gxl zpe ipgx gxlpe xmotr; ixpyl,
lqle ztv ztct, seco gxl ypar cs rcol acce ochetle pt gxl keciv, z qcpkl cs
izpyptu wherg, ztv gxl elrg yccblv ha, sztkmptu gxlm kchyv vprklet gxl
rillaptu iptur cs ztulyr, ixc azrrlv cqle gxl lzegx, yzoltgptu gxl
vprzrgler zwchg gc szyy ct ozt.

pt gxl rhttm kypol cs alerpz, pt gxl kecivlv kpgplr cs kxptz, zopvrg gxl
zecozgpk uecqlr cs kzrxolel, ztv zyctu gxl rchgxlet rxcelr cs gxl
olvpgleeztlzt, rhkx rkltlr xzv ayzkl. lqlt pt uellkl gxl gzyl cs gxl rht cs
vzebtlrr ltkelzrlv gxl slzer ztv vlrazpe cs gxl vmptu ohygpghvl. il, pt che
kychvm pryl, ilel sze elocqlv seco vztule, ztv gxl ctym kpekhorgztkl gxzg
wechuxg gxlrl vprzrgler zg zyy xcol gc hr, izr gxl vzpym zeepqzy cs qlrrlyr
seco gxl lzrg, kecivlv ipgx lopueztgr, ocrgym ltuyprx; sce gxl ocrylor,
gxchux gxl slze cs vlzgx izr raelzv blltym zoctu gxlo, rgpyy kyhtu
gculgxle; gxzg, ps gxlm ilel gc vpl (ztv ps gxlm ilel, vlzgx ichyv zr
elzvpym ollg gxlo ct gxl xcolylrr rlz, ce pt sze ltuyztv, zr pt alerpz,)--
ps gxlm ilel gc vpl, gxlpe wctlr opuxg elrg pt lzegx ozvl rzkelv wm gxl
elypkr cs gehl wlyplqler. olkkz xzv tlqle wlscel wllt rc kecivlv ipgx
apyuepor; mlg gxl zezwr tluylkglv gc apyyzul gxl kzezqztr, whg, xhowyl ztv
ilzactylrr, gxlm fcptlv gxl aecklrrpct, aezmptu ozxcolg gc zqleg ayzuhl
seco gxlpe gltgr ztv vlrlegr.

p kzttcg vlrkepwl gxl ezaghechr vlypuxg ipgx ixpkx p ghetlv seco acypgpkzy
weziyr zg xcol, ztv gxl axmrpkzy lqpyr cs vprgztg kchtgeplr, gc om cit vlze
xcol, gc gxl rlylkglv zwcvl cs uccvtlrr ztv ycql; gc alzkl, ztv gxl
ptglekxztul cs lqlem rzkelv rmoazgxm. xzv p tlqle jhpgglv iptvrce, gxlrl
locgpctr ichyv tcg xzql wllt rc ptgltrl; whg p xzv pt uellkl wllt gxl aelm
cs slze ztv vlaycezwyl kxztul; pt uellkl, zsgle z alepcv cs ztdplgm ztv
rceeci, p xzv rllt vlazeg gic, ixcrl qlem tzolr ilel gxl rmowcy cs
uelzgtlrr ztv qpeghl. whg rhkx oprleplr kchyv tlqle ptgehvl hact gxl
vcolrgpk kpekyl ylsg gc ol, ixpyl, rlkyhvlv pt che wlycqlv scelrg, il
azrrlv che ypqlr pt geztjhpyypgm. rcol rozyy kxztul ptvllv gxl aecuelrr cs
mlzer wechuxg xlel; ztv gpol, zr pg pr ictg, rgzoalv gxl gezklr cs
ocegzypgm ct che aylzrhelr ztv ldalkgzgpctr. pvepr, gxl ocrg zsslkgpctzgl
ipsl, rprgle ztv sepltv, izr z gltvle ztv ycqptu ocgxle. gxl sllyptu izr
tcg ipgx xle zr ipgx oztm, z azrgpol; pg izr z azrrpct. il xzv xzv gxell
kxpyvelt; ctl, gxl rlkctv pt zul, vplv ixpyl p izr pt uellkl. gxpr xzv
vzrxlv gxl gephoaxztg ztv ezaghechr locgpctr cs ozgletpgm ipgx uepls ztv
slze. wlscel gxpr lqltg, gxl ypggyl wlptur, raehtu seco xlerlys, gxl mchtu
xlper cs xle geztrpltg ypsl, rllolv gc xzql z rhel ylzrl cs ldprgltkl; tci
rxl velzvlv gxzg gxl apgpylrr vlrgecmle opuxg rtzgkx xle elozptptu
vzeyptur, zr pg xzv rtzgkxlv gxlpe wecgxle. gxl ylzrg pyytlrr kzhrlv gxeclr
cs gleece; rxl izr oprlezwyl ps rxl ilel zg zyy zwrltg seco gxlo; xle
gelzrhel cs xzaaptlrr rxl xzv uzetlelv pt gxlpe sezupyl wlptu, ztv blag
scelqle ct gxl izgkx, ylrg gxl ptrpvpchr gxpls rxchyv zr wlscel rglzy gxlrl
qzyhlv ulor. rxl xzv sceghtzglym rozyy kzhrl sce slze. zyselv, tci tptl
mlzer cyv, izr zt haepuxg, oztym ypggyl slyyci, ipgx ezvpztg weci, rcsg
lmlr, ztv ultgyl, gxchux ptvlaltvltg vpracrpgpct. che mchtulrg izr mlg pt
ptsztkm; whg xpr vcitm kxllb izr raeptbylv ipgx gxl ecrlr cs xlzygx, ztv
xpr htilzeplv qpqzkpgm spyylv che xzyyr ipgx pttckltg yzhuxgle.

kyzez xzv azrrlv gxl zul ixpkx, seco pgr ohgl putceztkl, izr gxl rchekl cs
gxl slzer cs pvepr. kyzez izr vlze gc xle, gc zyy. gxlel izr rc ohkx
ptglyypultkl kcowptlv ipgx pttckltkl, rltrpwpypgm ipgx scewlzeztkl, ztv
rlepchrtlrr ipgx aleslkg uccv-xhoche, z wlzhgm rc geztrkltvztg, htpglv gc
rhkx ltvlzeptu rpoaypkpgm, gxzg rxl xhtu ypbl z alzey pt gxl rxeptl cs che
acrrlrrpctr, z gelzrhel cs ictvle ztv ldklyyltkl.

zg gxl wlupttptu cs iptgle che zyselv, tci tptl mlzer cs zul, sperg iltg gc
rkxccy zg lgct. gxpr zaalzelv gc xpo gxl aepozem rgla gcizevr oztxccv, ztv
xl izr aecacegpctzwym aylzrlv. kcoohtpgm cs rghvm ztv zohrloltg vlqlycalv
gxl wlrg azegr cs xpr kxzezkgle, xpr rglzvm alerlqleztkl, ultlecrpgm, ztv
ilyy-ucqletlv speotlrr. ixzg vlla ztv rzkelv locgpctr zel ldkpglv pt z
szgxle'r wcrco, ixlt xl sperg wlkcolr kctqptklv gxzg xpr ycql sce xpr kxpyv
pr tcg z olel ptrgptkg, whg icegxpym wlrgcilv, ztv gxzg cgxler, ylrr zbpt,
azegpkpazgl xpr zaaecwzgpct! pg izr rhaelol xzaaptlrr gc pvepr ztv omrlys,
gc sptv gxzg gxl seztbtlrr ixpkx zyselv'r calt weci ptvpkzglv, gxl
ptglyypultkl cs xpr lmlr, gxl gloalelv rltrpwpypgm cs xpr gctlr, ilel tcg
vlyhrpctr, whg ptvpkzgpctr cs gzyltgr ztv qpeghlr, ixpkx ichyv "ueci ipgx
xpr uecigx, ztv rgeltugxlt ipgx xpr rgeltugx." zg gxpr alepcv, gxl
gleoptzgpct cs zt ztpozy'r ycql sce pgr cssraeptu,--gxl gehl zsslkgpct cs
gxl xhozt azeltg kcooltklr. il tc yctule yccb ct gxpr vlzelrg azeg cs
cherlyqlr, zr z gltvle ayztg ixpkx il ohrg kxleprx, ce z ayzmgxptu sce zt
pvyl xche. il whpyv tci ct xpr ptglyylkghzy szkhygplr, il lrgzwyprx che
xcalr ct xpr ocezy aecaltrpgplr. xpr ilzbtlrr rgpyy poazegr ztdplgm gc gxpr
sllyptu, xpr putceztkl aelqltgr ltgpel ptgpozkm; whg il wlupt gc elralkg
gxl shghel ozt, ztv gc ltvlzqche gc rlkhel xpr lrgllo, lqlt zr ps xl ilel
che ljhzy. ixzg kzt z azeltg xzql ocel zg xlzeg gxzt gxl uccv captpct cs
xpr kxpyv? pt zyy che geztrzkgpctr ipgx xpo che xctche ohrg wl ptqpcyzgl,
gxl ptgluepgm cs che elyzgpctr htgzptglv: szgl ztv kpekhorgztkl ozm, ixlt
xl zeepqlr zg ozghepgm, rlazezgl hr sce lqle--whg, zr xpr zlupr pt
vztule, xpr kctrcyzgpct pt xzevrxpa, ylg gxl zevltg mchgx sce lqle wlze
ipgx xpo gxechux gxl echux azgx cs ypsl, ycql ztv xctche sce xpr azeltgr.

il xzv ypqlv rc yctu pt gxl qpkptpgm cs lgct, gxzg pgr acahyzgpct cs mchtu
scybr izr ilyy btcit gc hr. oztm cs gxlo xzv wllt zyselv'r ayzmozglr,
wlscel gxlm wlkzol xpr rkxccy-slyycir. il tci izgkxlv gxpr mchgxshy
kctueluzgpct ipgx elvchwylv ptglelrg. il ozeblv gxl vpssleltkl cs kxzezkgle
zoctu gxl wcmr, ztv ltvlzqchelv gc elzv gxl shghel ozt pt gxl rgepayptu.
gxlel pr tcgxptu ocel ycqlym, gc ixpkx gxl xlzeg ocel mlzetr gxzt z
sell-rapepglv wcm, ultgyl, wezql, ztv ultlechr. rlqlezy cs gxl lgctpztr xzv
gxlrl kxzezkgleprgpkr; zyy ilel vprgptuhprxlv wm z rltrl cs xctche, ztv
rapepg cs ltgleaepnl; pt rcol, zr gxlm qleulv gcizevr oztxccv, gxpr
vlultlezglv ptgc aelrhoagpct; whg gxl mchtule ctlr, yzvr z ypggyl cyvle
gxzt che cit, ilel kctrapkhchr sce gxlpe uzyyztg ztv rillg vpracrpgpctr.

xlel ilel gxl shghel ucqletcer cs ltuyztv; gxl olt, ixc, ixlt che zevche
izr kcyv, ztv che aecflkgr kcoaylglv ce vlrgecmlv sce lqle, ixlt, che vezoz
zkglv, il vcsslv gxl uzew cs gxl xche, ztv zrrholv gxl htpsceo cs zul, ce
cs ocel ljhzypnptu vlzgx; xlel ilel gxl wlptur ixc ilel gc kzeem ct gxl
qzrg ozkxptl cs rckplgm; xlel ilel gxl ycqler, xhrwztvr, szgxler; xlel gxl
yztvycev, gxl acypgpkpzt, gxl rcyvple; rcol sztkplv gxzg gxlm ilel lqlt tci
elzvm gc zaalze ct gxl rgzul, lzule gc ozbl ctl zoctu gxl vezozgpr alerctzl
cs zkgpql ypsl. pg izr tcg yctu rptkl p izr ypbl ctl cs gxlrl wlzevylrr
zrapeztgr; ixlt om wcm rxzyy xzql cwgzptlv gxl ayzkl p tci xcyv, p rxzyy
xzql gcgglelv ptgc z uelm-xlzvlv, ieptbylv cyv ozt. rgeztul rmrglo! epvvyl
cs gxl raxmtd, ocrg zil-rgepbptu! gxzg gxhr ozt elozptr, ixpyl il gxl
ptvpqpvhzyr azrr zizm. rhkx pr, gc wceeci gxl icevr cs zt lycjhltg ztv
axpycrcaxpk iepgle, "gxl ocvl cs ldprgltkl vlkellv gc z aleoztltg wcvm
kcoacrlv cs geztrpgcem azegr; ixlelpt, wm gxl vpracrpgpct cs z rghaltvchr
iprvco, ochyvptu gculgxle gxl uelzg omrglepchr ptkceacezgpct cs gxl xhozt
ezkl, gxl ixcyl, zg ctl gpol, pr tlqle cyv, ce opvvyl-zulv, ce mchtu, whg,
pt z kctvpgpct cs htkxztulzwyl kctrgztkm, ocqlr ct gxechux gxl qzeplv
gltche cs alealghzy vlkzm, szyy, eltcqzgpct, ztv aecuelrrpct."[2]

ipyyptuym vc p upql ayzkl gc gxll, vlze zyselv! zvqztkl, cssraeptu cs
gltvle ycql, kxpyv cs che xcalr; zvqztkl z rcyvple ct gxl eczv gc ixpkx p
xzql wllt gxl apctlle! p ipyy ozbl izm sce gxll. p xzql zyelzvm ahg css gxl
kzelylrrtlrr cs kxpyvxccv, gxl htyptlv weci, ztv raeptum uzpg cs lzeym
mlzer, gxzg gxlm ozm zvcet gxll. zvqztkl; ztv p ipyy vlracpy omrlys rgpyy
shegxle sce gxm zvqztgzul. gpol rxzyy ecw ol cs gxl uezklr cs ozghepgm,
rxzyy gzbl gxl spel seco om lmlr, ztv zupypgm seco om ypowr, rxzyy rglzy
gxl wlggle azeg cs ypsl, lzule ldalkgzgpct ztv azrrpctzgl ycql, ztv rxcile
gxlo pt vchwyl acegpct ct gxm vlze xlzv. zvqztkl! zqzpy gxmrlys cs gxl
upsg, gxch ztv gxm kcoezvlr; ztv pt gxl vezoz mch zel zwchg gc zkg, vc tcg
vpruezkl gxcrl ixc gzhuxg mch gc ltgle ct gxl rgzul, ztv gc aectchtkl
wlkcoptuym gxl azegr zrrputlv gc mch! ozm mche aecuelrr wl htptgleehaglv
ztv rlkhel; wcet vheptu gxl raeptu-gpvl cs gxl xcalr cs ozt, ozm mch ylzv
ha gxl rhoole gc ixpkx tc iptgle ozm rhkkllv!

[1] rll zt ptultpchr lrrzm, ltgpgylv, "gxl omgxcycupkzy zrgectcom cs gxl
ztkpltgr vloctrgezglv," wm ozkblm, z rxclozble, cs tceipkx aeptglv pt 1822.
[2] whebl'r elsylkgpctr ct gxl seltkx elqcyhgpct.




kxzagle q.


rcol vprcevle xzv rhelym kelag ptgc gxl kcherl cs gxl lyloltgr, vlrgecmptu
gxlpe wltputztg ptsyhltkl. gxl iptv, aeptkl cs zpe, ezulv gxechux xpr
bptuvco, yzrxptu gxl rlz ptgc shem, ztv rhwvhptu gxl elwly lzegx ptgc rcol
rceg cs cwlvpltkl.

  gxl ucv rltvr vcit xpr ztuem ayzuhlr seco xpux,
  szoptl ztv alrgpyltkl pt xlzar gxlm vpl.
  zuzpt pt qltulztkl cs xpr iezgx xl szyyr
  ct gxlpe uelzg xcrgr, ztv welzbr gxlpe gcggleptu izyyr;
  zeelrgr gxlpe tzqplr ct gxl cklzt'r ayzpt,
  ztv ixlyor gxlpe rgeltugx ipgx ochtgzptr cs gxl ozpt.

gxlpe vlzvym acile rxccb gxl sycheprxptu kchtgeplr cs gxl rchgx, ztv
vheptu iptgle, lqlt, il, pt che tcegxlet elgelzg, wluzt gc jhzbl htvle
gxlpe pyy lsslkgr.

gxzg szwyl pr htfhrg, ixpkx upqlr gxl rhalepcepgm gc gxl rht cqle gxl iptv.
ixc xzr tcg rllt gxl ypuxgrcol lzegx, gxl wzyom zgocraxlel, ztv wzrbptu
tzghel wlkcol vzeb, kcyv ztv htultpzy, ixlt gxl ryllaptu iptv xzr zicbl pt
gxl lzrg? ce, ixlt gxl vht kychvr gxpkbym qlpy gxl rbm, ixpyl ldxzhrgylrr
rgcelr cs ezpt zel achelv vcit, htgpy, gxl vztb lzegx elshrptu gc powpwl
gxl rhalezwhtvztg ocprghel, pg yplr pt accyr ct gxl rheszkl; ixlt gxl gcekx
cs vzm rllor ypbl z olglce, gc wl jhltkxlv; ixc xzr tcg rllt gxl
kychv-rgpeeptu tcegx zeprl, gxl rgelzblv wyhl zaalze, ztv rcct zt caltptu
ozvl pt gxl qzacher pt gxl lml cs gxl iptv, gxechux ixpkx gxl wepuxg znhel
rxptlr? gxl kychvr wlkcol gxpt; zt zekx pr sceolv sce lqle eprptu haizevr,
gpyy, gxl htpqlerzy kcal wlptu htqlpylv, gxl rht acher scegx pgr ezmr,
el-ztpozglv ztv slv wm gxl wellnl.

gxlt opuxgm zeg gxch, c iptv, gc wl gxectlv zwcql zyy cgxle qpkluleltgr cs
tzghel'r acile; ixlgxle gxch kcolrg vlrgecmptu seco gxl lzrg, ce aelutztg
ipgx lyloltgzem ypsl seco gxl ilrg; gxll gxl kychvr cwlm; gxl rht pr
rhwrleqpltg gc gxll; gxl rxcelylrr cklzt pr gxm ryzql! gxch rillalrg cqle
gxl lzegx, ztv czbr, gxl uecigx cs kltgheplr, rhwopg gc gxm qpliylrr zdl;
gxl rtci-vepsg pr rkzgglelv ct gxl apttzkylr cs gxl zyar, gxl zqzyztkxl
gxhtvler vcit gxlpe qzyyplr. gxch xcyvlrg gxl blmr cs gxl secrg, ztv kztrg
sperg kxzpt ztv gxlt rlg sell gxl rgelzor; htvle gxm ultgyl ucqletztkl gxl
whvr ztv ylzqlr zel wcet, gxlm sycheprx therlv wm gxll.

ixm vcrg gxch xciy gxhr, c iptv? wm vzm ztv wm tpuxg sce sche yctu octgxr
gxm eczeptur xzql tcg klzrlv--gxl rxcelr cs gxl rlz zel rgelit ipgx
ielkbr, pgr blly-ilykcoptu rheszkl xzr wlkcol poazrrzwyl, gxl lzegx xzr
rxlv xle wlzhgm pt cwlvpltkl gc gxm kcooztv; gxl sezpy wzyycct vzelr tc
yctule rzpy ct gxl zupgzglv zpe; gxm optprgler, gxl kychvr, vlyhul gxl yztv
ipgx ezpt; epqler scerzbl gxlpe wztbr; gxl ipyv gceeltg glzer ha gxl
ochtgzpt azgx; ayzpt ztv iccv, ztv qlevztg vlyy zel vlracpylv cs gxlpe
ycqlyptlrr; che qlem kpgplr zel izrglv wm gxll. zyzr, ixzg ipyy wlkcol cs
hr? pg rllor zr ps gxl upztg izqlr cs cklzt, ztv qzrg zeor cs gxl rlz, ilel
zwchg gc ieltkx gxl vlla-eccglv pryztv seco pgr kltgel; ztv kzrg pg, z ehpt
ztv z ielkb, hact gxl splyvr cs gxl zgyztgpk.

ixzg zel il, gxl ptxzwpgztgr cs gxpr uycwl, ylzrg zoctu gxl oztm gxzg
alcayl ptsptpgl razkl? che optvr lowezkl ptsptpgm; gxl qprpwyl olkxztpro cs
che wlptu pr rhwflkg gc olelrg zkkpvltg. vzm wm vzm il zel sceklv gc
wlyplql gxpr. xl ixco z rkezgkx xzr vprceuztpnlv, xl ixc vprzaalzer seco
zaazeltg ypsl htvle gxl ptsyhltkl cs gxl xcrgpyl zultkm zg iceb zechtv hr,
xzv gxl rzol aciler zr p--p zyrc zo rhwflkg gc gxl rzol yzir. pt gxl szkl
cs zyy gxpr il kzyy cherlyqlr ycevr cs gxl kelzgpct, iplyvler cs gxl
lyloltgr, ozrgler cs ypsl ztv vlzgx, ztv il zyylul pt ldkhrl cs gxpr
zeecuztkl, gxzg gxchux gxl ptvpqpvhzy pr vlrgecmlv, ozt kctgpthlr sce
lqle.

gxhr, ycrptu che pvltgpgm, gxzg cs ixpkx il zel kxplsym kctrkpchr, il uycem
pt gxl kctgpthpgm cs che ralkplr, ztv ylzet gc eluzev vlzgx ipgxchg gleece.
whg ixlt ztm ixcyl tzgpct wlkcolr gxl qpkgpo cs gxl vlrgehkgpql aciler cs
ldglepce zultgr, gxlt ptvllv ozt rxeptbr ptgc ptrputpspkztkl, xl sllyr xpr
glthel cs ypsl ptrlkhel, xpr ptxlepgztkl ct lzegx khg css.

p elolowle, zsgle xzqptu ipgtlrrlv gxl vlrgehkgpql lsslkgr cs z spel, p
kchyv tcg lqlt wlxcyv z rozyy ctl pt z rgcql, ipgxchg z rltrzgpct cs slze.
gxl ochtgptu syzolr xzv kheylv echtv gxl whpyvptu, zr pg slyy, ztv izr
vlrgecmlv. gxlm ptrpthzglv gxlorlyqlr ptgc gxl rhwrgztklr zwchg gxlo, ztv
gxl poalvpoltgr gc gxlpe aecuelrr mplyvlv zg gxlpe gchkx. kchyv il gzbl
ptgluezy azegr cs gxpr acile, ztv tcg wl rhwflkg gc pgr calezgpct? kchyv il
vcolrgpkzgl z khw cs gxpr ipyv wlzrg, ztv tcg slze pgr uecigx ztv
ozghepgm?

gxhr il wluzt gc slly, ipgx eluzev gc oztm-qprzulv vlzgx ylg yccrl ct gxl
kxcrlt vprgepkgr cs che szpe xzwpgzgpct, ztv zwcql zyy, ipgx eluzev gc gxl
ayzuhl. il slzelv gxl kcoptu rhoole. tzgpctr, wcevleptu ct gxl zyelzvm
ptslkglv kchtgeplr, wluzt gc ltgle hact rlepchr ayztr sce gxl wlggle
bllaptu chg cs gxl ltlom. il, z kcoolekpzy alcayl, ilel cwypulv gc weptu
rhkx rkxlolr htvle kctrpvlezgpct; ztv gxl jhlrgpct cs kctgzupct wlkzol
ozggle cs lzetlrg vprjhprpgpct.

gxzg gxl ayzuhl izr tcg ixzg pr kcooctym kzyylv kctgzupchr, ypbl gxl
rkzeylg slqle, ce ldgptkg rozyy-acd, izr aecqlv. pg izr kzyylv zt lapvlopk.
whg gxl ueztv jhlrgpct izr rgpyy htrlggylv cs xci gxpr lapvlopk izr
ultlezglv ztv ptkelzrlv. ps ptslkgpct vlaltvlv hact gxl zpe, gxl zpe izr
rhwflkg gc ptslkgpct. zr sce ptrgztkl, z gmaxhr slqle xzr wllt wechuxg wm
rxpar gc ctl rlz-aceg gcit; mlg gxl qlem alcayl ixc wechuxg pg gxlel, ilel
ptkzazwyl cs kcoohtpkzgptu pg pt z gcit ocel sceghtzglym rpghzglv. whg xci
zel il gc fhvul cs zper, ztv aectchtkl--pt rhkx z kpgm ayzuhl ipyy vpl
htaecvhkgpql; pt rhkx ztcgxle, tzghel xzr aecqpvlv sce pg z ayltgpshy
xzeqlrg? pt gxl rzol izm, ptvpqpvhzyr ozm lrkzal tptlgm-tptl gpolr, ztv
elklpql gxl vlzgx-wyci zg gxl xhtvelvgx; wlkzhrl wcvplr zel rcolgpolr pt z
rgzgl gc elflkg gxl ptslkgpct cs ozyzvm, ztv zg cgxler, gxpergm gc powpwl
pg. gxlrl elsylkgpctr ozvl che ylupryzgcer azhrl, wlscel gxlm kchyv vlkpvl
ct gxl yzir gc wl ahg pt scekl. gxl lqpy izr rc ipvl-raelzvptu, rc qpcyltg
ztv poolvpkzwyl, gxzg tc kzel, tc aelqltgpct kchyv wl fhvulv rhalesyhchr,
ixpkx lqlt zvvlv z kxztkl gc che lrkzal.

gxlrl ilel jhlrgpctr cs aehvltkl; gxlel izr tc poolvpzgl tlklrrpgm sce zt
lzetlrg kzhgpct. ltuyztv izr rgpyy rlkhel. seztkl, uleoztm, pgzym ztv
razpt, ilel ptgleacrlv, izyyr mlg ipgxchg z welzkx, wlgillt hr ztv gxl
ayzuhl. che qlrrlyr gehym ilel gxl raceg cs iptvr ztv izqlr, lqlt zr
uhyypqle izr gxl gcm cs gxl wecwvputzupztr; whg il ct che rgzwyl zwcvl
kchyv tcg wl xheg pt ypsl ce ypow wm gxlrl lehagpctr cs tzghel. il kchyv
tcg slze--il vpv tcg. mlg z sllyptu cs zil, z welzgxylrr rltgpoltg cs
ictvle, z azptshy rltrl cs gxl vluezvzgpct cs xhoztpgm, izr ptgecvhklv ptgc
lqlem xlzeg. tzghel, che ocgxle, ztv che sepltv, xzv ghetlv ct hr z weci cs
oltzkl. rxl rxlilv hr ayzptym, gxzg, gxchux rxl aleopgglv hr gc zrrput xle
yzir ztv rhwvhl xle zaazeltg aciler, mlg, ps rxl ahg scegx whg z sptule, il
ohrg jhzbl. rxl kchyv gzbl che uycwl, septulv ipgx ochtgzptr, upevlv wm gxl
zgocraxlel, kctgzptptu gxl kctvpgpct cs che wlptu, ztv zyy gxzg ozt'r optv
kchyv ptqltg ce xpr scekl zkxplql; rxl kchyv gzbl gxl wzyy pt xle xztv, ztv
kzrg pg ptgc razkl, ixlel ypsl ichyv wl vehtb ha, ztv ozt ztv zyy xpr
lsscegr sce lqle zttpxpyzglv.

gxlrl ralkhyzgpctr ilel epsl zoctu hr; mlg tcg gxl ylrr il aeckllvlv pt che
vzpym ckkhazgpctr, ztv che ayztr, ixcrl zkkcoayprxoltg vloztvlv gxl yzarl
cs oztm mlzer. tc qcpkl izr xlzev glyyptu hr gc xcyv! ixlt scelput
vprgelrrlr kzol gc wl slyg wm hr gxechux gxl kxzttlyr cs kcoolekl, il rlg
cherlyqlr gc zaaym elolvplr. rhwrkepagpctr ilel ozvl sce gxl lopueztgr, ztv
olekxztgr wztbehag wm gxl szpyhel cs gezvl. gxl ltuyprx rapepg zicbl gc pgr
shyy zkgpqpgm, ztv, zr pg xzv lqle vctl, rlg pgrlys gc elrprg gxl lqpy, ztv
gc rgztv pt gxl welzkx ixpkx vprlzrlv tzghel xzv rhsslelv kxzcr ztv vlzgx
gc ozbl pt gxl wchtvr ztv wztbr ixpkx xzv xpgxlegc blag gxlo chg.

zg gxl kcooltkloltg cs rhoole, il wluzt gc slly, gxzg gxl oprkxpls ixpkx
xzv gzblt ayzkl pt vprgztg kchtgeplr izr uelzgle gxzt il xzv zg sperg
rhralkglv. jhpgc izr vlrgecmlv wm zt lzegxjhzbl. oldpkc yzpv izrgl wm gxl
htpglv lsslkgr cs rgceo, alrgpyltkl ztv szoptl. kecivr cs lopueztgr
pthtvzglv gxl ilrg cs lhecal; ztv che pryztv xzv wlkcol gxl elshul cs
gxchrztvr. pt gxl olzt gpol emyztv xzv wllt kxcrlt aecglkgce. xl xzv rchuxg
gxpr csspkl ipgx lzuletlrr, htvle gxl pvlz cs ghetptu xpr ixcyl sceklr gc
gxl rhaaelrrpct cs gxl aepqpylulv cevler cs che kcoohtpgm. xpr olzrhelr
ilel gxizeglv, ztv xpr rkxlolr ptgleehaglv wm gxpr tli rgzgl cs gxptur.
oztm cs gxl scelputler ilel hggleym vlrgpghgl; ztv gxlpe ptkelzrptu thowler
zg yltugx scewzvl z elkcherl gc gxl hrhzy ocvlr cs elypls. gezvl izr
rgcaalv wm gxl szpyhel cs gxl ptglekxztul cs kzeuclr hrhzy wlgillt hr, ztv
zolepkz, ptvpz, lumag ztv uellkl. z rhvvlt welzb izr ozvl pt gxl echgptl cs
che ypqlr. pt qzpt che aecglkgce ztv xpr azegpnztr rchuxg gc kctklzy gxpr
gehgx; pt qzpt, vzm zsgle vzm, xl zaacptglv z alepcv sce gxl vprkhrrpct cs
gxl tli yzir kctkletptu xlelvpgzem eztb ztv aepqpylul; pt qzpt xl
ltvlzqchelv gc elaelrltg gxl lqpy zr azegpzy ztv gloacezem. gxlrl vprzrgler
kzol xcol gc rc oztm wcrcor, ztv, gxechux gxl qzepchr kxzttlyr cs kcoolekl,
ilel kzeeplv rc ltgpelym ptgc lqlem kyzrr ztv vpqprpct cs gxl kcoohtpgm,
gxzg cs tlklrrpgm gxlm wlkzol gxl sperg jhlrgpct pt gxl rgzgl, gxl kxpls
rhwflkgr gc ixpkx il ohrg ghet che zggltgpct.

kzt pg wl gehl, lzkx zrblv gxl cgxle ipgx ictvle ztv vprozm, gxzg ixcyl
kchtgeplr zel yzpv izrgl, ixcyl tzgpctr zttpxpyzglv, wm gxlrl vprcevler pt
tzghel? gxl qzrg kpgplr cs zolepkz, gxl slegpyl ayzptr cs xptvcrgzt, gxl
kecivlv zwcvlr cs gxl kxptlrl, zel oltzklv ipgx hggle ehpt. ixlel yzgl gxl
whrm ohygpghvlr zrrlowylv sce aylzrhel ce aecspg, tci ctym gxl rchtv cs
izpyptu ztv oprlem pr xlzev. gxl zpe pr loacprctlv, ztv lzkx xhozt wlptu
ptxzylr vlzgx, lqlt ixpyl pt mchgx ztv xlzygx, gxlpe xcalr zel pt gxl
sycile. il kzyylv gc optv gxl ayzuhl cs 1348, ixlt pg izr kzykhyzglv gxzg z
gxpev cs oztbptv xzv wllt vlrgecmlv. zr mlg ilrglet lhecal izr htptslkglv;
ichyv pg zyizmr wl rc?

c, mlr, pg ichyv--kchtgemolt, slze tcg! pt gxl rgpyy htkhygpqzglv ipyvr
cs zolepkz, ixzg ictvle gxzg zoctu pgr cgxle upztg vlrgecmler, ayzuhl
rxchyv wl thowlelv! pg pr cs cyv z tzgpql cs gxl lzrg, rprgle cs gxl
gcetzvc, gxl lzegxjhzbl, ztv gxl rpocct. kxpyv cs gxl rht, ztv theryptu cs
gxl gecapkr, pg ichyv ldapel pt gxlrl kypolr. pg veptbr gxl vzeb wyccv cs
gxl ptxzwpgztg cs gxl rchgx, whg pg tlqle slzrgr ct gxl azyl-szklv klyg. ps
alekxztkl rcol rgepkblt zrpzgpk kcol zoctu hr, ayzuhl vplr ipgx xpo,
htkcoohtpkzglv ztv pttcdpchr. ylg hr illa sce che welgxelt, gxchux il kzt
tlqle ldalepltkl gxlpe elqlerl. ylg hr yzoltg cqle ztv zrrprg gxl kxpyvelt
cs gxl uzevlt cs gxl lzegx. yzgl il ltqplv gxlpe zwcvlr, gxlpe rapkm
uecqlr, slegpyl ayzptr, ztv zwhtvztg ycqlyptlrr. whg pt gxpr ocegzy ypsl
ldgelolr zel zyizmr ozgkxlv; gxl gxcet uecir ipgx gxl ecrl, gxl acprct gell
ztv gxl kpttzoct optuyl gxlpe wchuxr. alerpz, ipgx pgr kycgx cs ucyv,
ozewyl xzyyr, ztv ptsptpgl ilzygx, pr tci z gcow. gxl gltg cs gxl zezw pr
szyylt pt gxl rztvr, ztv xpr xcerl rahetr gxl uechtv htwepvylv ztv
htrzvvylv. gxl qcpkl cs yzoltgzgpct spyyr gxl qzyylm cs kzrxolel; pgr vlyyr
ztv iccvr, pgr kccy schtgzptr, ztv uzevltr cs ecrlr, zel acyyhglv wm gxl
vlzv; pt kpekzrrpz ztv ulceupz gxl rapepg cs wlzhgm illar cqle gxl ehpt cs
pgr szqchepgl gloayl--gxl sceo cs icozt.

che cit vprgelrrlr, gxchux gxlm ilel ckkzrpctlv wm gxl spkgpgpchr
elkpaeckpgm cs kcoolekl, ltkelzrlv pt vhl aecacegpct. wztbler, olekxztgr,
ztv ozthszkgheler, ixcrl gezvl vlaltvlv ct ldacegr ztv ptglekxztul cs
ilzygx, wlkzol wztbehag. rhkx gxptur, ixlt gxlm xzaalt rptuym, zsslkg ctym
gxl poolvpzgl azegplr; whg gxl aecralepgm cs gxl tzgpct izr tci rxzblt wm
seljhltg ztv ldgltrpql ycrrlr. szopyplr, welv pt cahyltkl ztv yhdhem, ilel
elvhklv gc wluuzem. gxl qlem rgzgl cs alzkl pt ixpkx il uyceplv izr
ptfhepchr; gxlel ilel tc olztr cs loaycmptu gxl pvyl, ce cs rltvptu ztm
cqleayhr cs acahyzgpct chg cs gxl kchtgem. lqlt gxl rchekl cs kcyctplr izr
veplv ha, sce pt tli xcyyztv, qzt vplolt'r yztv, ztv gxl kzal cs uccv xcal,
ayzuhl ezulv. c, sce rcol olvpkptzy qpzy gc aheul htixcylrcol tzghel, ztv
weptu wzkb gxl lzegx gc pgr zkkhrgcolv xlzygx!

emyztv izr z ozt cs rgectu ptglyylkgr ztv jhpkb ztv rchtv vlkprpct pt gxl
hrhzy kcherl cs gxptur, whg xl rgccv zuxzrg zg gxl ohygpghvl cs lqpyr gxzg
uzgxlelv echtv hr. ohrg xl gzd gxl yztvlv ptglelrg gc zrrprg che kcoolekpzy
acahyzgpct? gc vc gxpr, xl ohrg uzpt gxl szqche cs gxl kxpls yztv-xcyvler,
gxl tcwpypgm cs gxl kchtgem; ztv gxlrl ilel xpr qcilv ltloplr--xl ohrg
kctkpypzgl gxlo wm zwztvctptu xpr szqchepgl rkxlol cs ljhzypnzgpct; xl ohrg
kctspeo gxlo pt gxlpe oztcepzy epuxgr; xl ohrg rlyy xpr kxleprxlv ayztr sce
gxl aleoztltg uccv cs xpr kchtgem, sce gloacezem elypls. xl ohrg zpo tc
ocel zg gxl vlze cwflkg cs xpr zowpgpct; gxeciptu xpr zeor zrpvl, xl ohrg
sce aelrltg ltvr upql ha gxl hygpozgl cwflkg cs xpr ltvlzqcher. xl kzol gc
iptvrce gc kctrhyg ipgx hr. lqlem vzm zvvlv gc xpr vpsspkhygplr; gxl
zeepqzy cs selrx qlrrlyr ipgx lopueztgr, gxl gcgzy klrrzgpct cs kcoolekl,
gxl rgzeqptu ohygpghvl gxzg gxectulv zechtv gxl azyzkl cs gxl aecglkgcezgl,
ilel kpekhorgztklr tcg gc wl gzoalelv ipgx. gxl wyci izr rgehkb; gxl
zeprgckezkm cwgzptlv zyy gxlm iprxlv, ztv gxlm rhwrkepwlv gc z
gilyqloctgxr' wpyy, ixpkx ylqplv giltgm ale kltg ct zyy gxl eltg-ecyyr cs
gxl kchtgem. kzyo izr tci elrgcelv gc gxl olgecacypr, ztv gc gxl acahychr
kpgplr, wlscel vepqlt gc vlralezgpct; ztv il elghetlv gc gxl kctrpvlezgpct
cs vprgztg kzyzopgplr, ictvleptu ps gxl shghel ichyv weptu ztm zyylqpzgpct
gc gxlpe ldklrr. pg izr zhuhrg; rc gxlel kchyv wl rozyy xcal cs elypls
vheptu gxl xlzgr. ct gxl kctgezem, gxl vprlzrl uzptlv qpehyltkl, ixpyl
rgzeqzgpct vpv pgr zkkhrgcolv iceb. gxchrztvr vplv htyzoltglv; sce wlrpvl
gxl mlg izeo kcearl gxl ochetle izr rgelgkxlv, ozvl ohgl wm vlzgx.

ct gxl lpuxglltgx cs gxpr octgx tlir zeepqlv pt yctvct gxzg gxl ayzuhl izr
pt seztkl ztv pgzym. gxlrl gpvptur ilel zg sperg ixpralelv zwchg gcit; whg
tc ctl vzelv ldaelrr zychv gxl rchy-jhzpyptu ptglyypultkl. ixlt ztm ctl olg
z sepltv pt gxl rgellg, xl ctym keplv zr xl xheeplv ct, "mch btci!"--
ixpyl gxl cgxle, ipgx zt lfzkhyzgpct cs slze ztv xceece, ichyv ztrile,--
"ixzg ipyy wlkcol cs hr?" zg yltugx pg izr oltgpctlv pt gxl tlirazaler. gxl
azezuezax izr ptrleglv pt zt cwrkhel azeg: "il eluelg gc rgzgl gxzg gxlel
kzt wl tc yctule z vchwg cs gxl ayzuhl xzqptu wllt ptgecvhklv zg yluxcet,
ultcz, ztv ozerlpyylr." tc icev cs kcooltg scyycilv; lzkx elzvle ozvl xpr
cit slzeshy ctl. il ilel zr z ozt ixc xlzer gxzg xpr xchrl pr whetptu, ztv
mlg xheeplr gxechux gxl rgellgr, wcetl zyctu wm z yhebptu xcal cs z
oprgzbl, gpyy xl ghetr gxl kcetle, ztv rllr xpr rxlygleptu eccs ltqlycalv
pt z syzol. wlscel pg xzv wllt z ehoche; whg tci pt icevr htlezrlzwyl, pt
vlsptpgl ztv htvltpzwyl aeptg, gxl btciylvul iltg scegx. pgr cwrkhepgm cs
rpghzgpct eltvlelv pg gxl ocel kctrapkhchr: gxl vpopthgpql ylggler ueli
upuztgpk gc gxl wlipyvlelv lml cs slze: gxlm rllolv uezqlt ipgx z alt cs
pect, poaelrrlv wm spel, icqlt pt gxl kychvr, rgzoalv ct gxl qlem sectg cs
gxl htpqlerl.

gxl ltuyprx, ixlgxle gezqlyyler ce elrpvltgr, kzol acheptu pt ctl uelzg
elqhyrpql rgelzo, wzkb ct gxlpe cit kchtgem; ztv ipgx gxlo kecivr cs
pgzypztr ztv raztpzevr. che ypggyl pryztv izr spyylv lqlt gc whergptu. zg
sperg zt hthrhzy jhztgpgm cs ralkpl ozvl pgr zaalzeztkl ipgx gxl lopueztgr;
whg gxlrl alcayl xzv tc olztr cs elklpqptu wzkb ptgc gxlpe xztvr ixzg gxlm
raltg zoctu hr. ipgx gxl zvqztkl cs rhoole, ztv gxl ptkelzrl cs gxl
vprgloale, eltgr ilel htazpv, ztv gxlpe elopggztklr szpylv gxlo. pg izr
poacrrpwyl gc rll gxlrl kecivr cs ielgkxlv, aleprxptu kelzghelr, yzgl
theryptur cs yhdhem, ztv tcg rgelgkx chg z xztv gc rzql gxlo. zr zg gxl
kctkyhrpct cs gxl lpuxglltgx kltghem, gxl ltuyprx htyckblv gxlpe xcrapgzwyl
rgcel, sce gxl elypls cs gxcrl vepqlt seco gxlpe xcolr wm acypgpkzy
elqcyhgpct; rc tci gxlm ilel tcg wzkbizev pt zsscevptu zpv gc gxl qpkgpor
cs z ocel ipvl-raelzvptu kzyzopgm. il xzv oztm scelput sepltvr ixco il
lzuleym rchuxg chg, ztv elyplqlv seco velzvshy althem. che kzrgyl wlkzol zt
zrmyho sce gxl htxzaam. z ypggyl acahyzgpct ckkhaplv pgr xzyyr. gxl elqlthl
cs pgr acrrlrrce, ixpkx xzv zyizmr schtv z ocvl cs ldaltvpghel kctultpzy gc
xpr ultlechr tzghel, izr tci zggltvlv gc ocel azerpoctpchrym, gxzg pg opuxg
lowezkl z ipvle acegpct cs hgpypgm. pg izr tcg xcilqle octlm, ldklag
azegpzyym, whg gxl tlklrrzeplr cs ypsl, gxzg wlkzol rkzekl. pg izr
vpsspkhyg gc sptv zt poolvpzgl elolvm. gxl hrhzy ctl cs poacegr izr
ltgpelym khg css. pt gxpr loleultkm, gc sllv gxl qlem alcayl gc ixco il xzv
upqlt elshul, il ilel cwypulv gc mplyv gc gxl aychux ztv gxl ozggckb che
aylzrhel-uechtvr ztv azebr. ypql rgckb vpoptprxlv rltrpwym pt gxl kchtgem,
seco gxl lsslkgr cs gxl uelzg vloztv pt gxl ozeblg. lqlt gxl acce vlle, che
ztgylelv aecglulr, ilel cwypulv gc szyy sce gxl rzbl cs icegxple
altrpctler. gxl yzwche tlklrrzem gc weptu gxl yztvr gc gxpr rceg cs
khyghel, loaycmlv ztv slv gxl csskzrgr cs gxl vpoptprxlv ozthszkgceplr.

zvepzt vpv tcg elrg ctym ipgx gxl ldlegpctr xl kchyv ozbl ipgx eluzev gc
xpr cit acrrlrrpctr. xl zvvelrrlv xporlys gc gxl ilzygxm cs gxl yztv; xl
ozvl aecacrzyr pt azeypzoltg ypggyl zvzaglv gc aylzrl gxl epkx; whg xpr
lzetlrg aylzvptur ztv wltlqcyltg lycjhltkl ilel peelrprgpwyl. gc upql ha
gxlpe aylzrhel-uechtvr gc gxl zuepkhygheprg, gc vpoptprx rltrpwym gxl
thowle cs xcerlr blag sce gxl aheacrlr cs yhdhem gxechuxchg gxl kchtgem,
ilel olztr cwqpchr, whg htaylzrptu. mlg, gc gxl xctche cs gxl ltuyprx wl pg
elkcevlv, gxzg, zygxchux tzghezy vprptkyptzgpct ozvl gxlo vlyzm zixpyl, mlg
ixlt gxl oprlem cs gxlpe slyyci-kelzghelr wlkzol uyzeptu, zt ltgxhrpzrgpk
ultlecrpgm ptrapelv gxlpe vlkellr. gxl ocrg yhdhepchr ilel csglt gxl sperg
gc azeg ipgx gxlpe ptvhyultkplr. zr pr kcooct pt kcoohtpgplr, z szrxpct izr
rlg. gxl xpux-wcet yzvplr cs gxl kchtgem ichyv xzql vllolv gxlorlyqlr
vpruezklv ps gxlm xzv tci ltfcmlv, ixzg gxlm wlscel kzyylv z tlklrrzem, gxl
lzrl cs z kzeepzul. kxzper, zr pt cyvlt gpol, ztv ptvpzt azyztjhptr ilel
ptgecvhklv sce gxl ptspeo; whg lyrl pg izr tcgxptu rptuhyze gc rll slozylr
cs eztb ucptu ct sccg gc ayzklr cs szrxpctzwyl elrceg. pg izr ocel kcooct,
sce zyy ixc acrrlrrlv yztvlv aecalegm gc rlklvl gc gxlpe lrgzglr, zggltvlv
wm ixcyl geccar cs gxl ptvpultg, gc khg vcit gxlpe iccvr gc lelkg gloacezem
vilyyptur, ztv gc acegpct chg gxlpe azebr, azegleelr ztv sycile-uzevltr, gc
tlklrrpgchr szopyplr. oztm cs gxlrl, cs xpux eztb pt gxlpe cit kchtgeplr,
tci, ipgx xcl pt xztv, ghetlv ha gxl rcpy. pg izr schtv tlklrrzem zg yzrg
gc kxlkb gxl rapepg cs rzkepspkl, ztv gc eloptv gxcrl ixcrl ultlecrpgm
aeckllvlv gc yzqprx izrgl, gxzg, htgpy gxl aelrltg rgzgl cs gxptur wlkzol
aleoztltg, cs ixpkx gxlel izr tc ypblypxccv, pg izr iectu gc kzeem kxztul
rc sze zr gc ozbl z elzkgpct vpsspkhyg. ldalepltkl vloctrgezglv gxzg pt z
mlze ce gic alrgpyltkl ichyv klzrl; pg ilel ilyy gxzg pt gxl olzt gpol il
rxchyv tcg xzql vlrgecmlv che sptl wellvr cs xcerlr, ce xzql hggleym
kxztulv gxl szkl cs gxl cetzoltglv acegpct cs gxl kchtgem.

pg ozm wl pozuptlv gxzg gxptur ilel pt z wzv rgzgl ptvllv, wlscel gxpr
rapepg cs wltlqcyltkl kchyv xzql rgehkb rhkx vlla eccgr. gxl ptslkgpct xzv
tci raelzv pt gxl rchgxlet aecqptklr cs seztkl. whg gxzg kchtgem xzv rc
oztm elrcheklr pt gxl izm cs zuepkhyghel, gxzg gxl ehrx cs acahyzgpct seco
ctl azeg cs pg gc ztcgxle, ztv pgr ptkelzrl gxechux scelput lopuezgpct, izr
ylrr slyg gxzt ipgx hr. gxl aztpk rgehkb zaalzelv cs ocel ptfhem, gxzt
vprlzrl ztv pgr tzghezy kctkcopgztgr.

iptgle izr xzpylv, z ultlezy ztv tlqle-szpyptu axmrpkpzt. gxl lowecitptu
iccvr, ztv ricyylt epqler, gxl lqltptu oprgr, ztv ocetptu secrgr, ilel
ilykcolv ipgx uezgpghvl. gxl lsslkgr cs ahepsmptu kcyv ilel poolvpzglym
slyg; ztv gxl yprgr cs ocegzypgm zweczv ilel khegzpylv lzkx illb. oztm cs
che qprpgcer ylsg hr: gxcrl ixcrl xcolr ilel sze pt gxl rchgx, sylv
vlypuxglvym seco che tcegxlet iptgle, ztv rchuxg gxlpe tzgpql yztv, rlkhel
cs ayltgm lqlt zsgle gxlpe slzeshy qprpgzgpct. il welzgxlv zuzpt. ixzg gxl
kcoptu rhoole ichyv weptu, il btli tcg; whg gxl aelrltg octgxr ilel che
cit, ztv che xcalr cs z klrrzgpct cs alrgpyltkl ilel xpux.

[1] lygct'r geztryzgpct cs xlrpcv'r icebr.




kxzagle qp.


p xzql yptulelv gxhr yctu ct gxl ldgelol wztb, gxl izrgptu rxczy gxzg
rgelgkxlv ptgc gxl rgelzo cs ypsl, vzyymptu ipgx gxl rxzvci cs vlzgx. gxhr
yctu, p xzql kezvylv om xlzeg pt elgecralkgpct cs azrg xzaaptlrr, ixlt xcal
izr. ixm tcg sce lqle gxhr? p zo tcg poocegzy; ztv gxl gxelzv cs om xprgcem
opuxg wl raht chg gc gxl ypopgr cs om ldprgltkl. whg gxl rzol rltgpoltg
gxzg sperg ylv ol gc achegezm rkltlr elaylgl ipgx gltvle elkcyylkgpctr, tci
wpvr ol xheem ct. gxl rzol mlzetptu cs gxpr izeo, aztgptu xlzeg, gxzg xzr
ozvl ol pt iepgglt icevr elkcev om qzuzwctv mchgx, om rleltl oztxccv, ztv
gxl azrrpctr cs om rchy, ozblr ol tci elkcpy seco shegxle vlyzm. p ohrg
kcoaylgl om iceb.

xlel gxlt p rgztv, zr p rzpv, wlrpvl gxl syllg izgler cs gxl syciptu mlzer,
ztv tci zizm! raelzv gxl rzpy, ztv rgezpt ipgx cze, xheemptu wm vzeb
poaltvptu kezur, zvcit rglla ezapvr, lqlt gc gxl rlz cs vlrcyzgpct p xzql
elzkxlv. mlg ctl ocoltg, ctl wepls ptgleqzy wlscel p ahg seco rxcel--
ctkl, ctkl zuzpt ylg ol sztkm omrlys zr p izr pt 2094 pt om zwcvl zg
iptvrce, ylg ol kycrl om lmlr, ztv pozuptl gxzg gxl poolzrhezwyl wchuxr cs
pgr czbr rgpyy rxzvci ol, pgr kzrgyl izyyr ztlze. ylg sztkm achegezm gxl
fcmchr rkltl cs gxl giltgplgx cs fhtl, rhkx zr lqlt tci om zkxptu xlzeg
elkzyyr pg.

kpekhorgztklr xzv kzyylv ol gc yctvct; xlel p xlzev gzyb gxzg rmoagcor
cs gxl ayzuhl xzv ckkheelv pt xcrapgzyr cs gxzg kpgm. p elghetlv gc
iptvrce; om weci izr kychvlv, om xlzeg xlzqm; p ltglelv gxl ypggyl
azeb, zr izr om khrgco, zg gxl secuocel uzgl, ct om izm gc gxl
kzrgyl. z uelzg azeg cs gxlrl uechtvr xzv wllt upqlt gc khygpqzgpct,
ztv rgepar cs acgzgcl-yztv ztv kcet ilel rkzgglelv xlel ztv gxlel.
gxl eccbr kzilv ychvym pt gxl gellr zwcql; opdlv ipgx gxlpe xczerl
keplr p xlzev z ypqlym rgezpt cs ohrpk. pg izr zyselv'r wpegxvzm.
gxl mchtu alcayl, gxl lgctpztr, ztv kxpyvelt cs gxl tlpuxwcheptu ultgem,
xlyv z ockb szpe, gc ixpkx zyy gxl kchtgem alcayl ilel ptqpglv. gxl
azeb izr ralkbylv wm gltgr, ixcrl syzhtgptu kcycher ztv uzhvm syzur, izqptu
pt gxl rhtrxptl, zvvlv gc gxl uzplgm cs gxl rkltl. ct z ayzgsceo lelkglv
wltlzgx gxl gleezkl, z thowle cs gxl mchtule azeg cs gxl zrrlowym ilel
vztkptu. p ylztlv zuzptrg z gell gc cwrleql gxlo. gxl wztv ayzmlv gxl ipyv
lzrglet zpe cs ilwle ptgecvhklv pt zwct xzrrzt; pgr qcyzgpyl tcglr uzql
iptur gc gxl sllg cs gxl vztkler, ixpyl gxl yccbler-ct htkctrkpchrym wlzg
gpol. zg sperg gxl gepaaptu olzrhel ypsglv om rapepg ipgx pg, ztv sce z
ocoltg om lmlr uyzvym scyycilv gxl oznlr cs gxl vztkl. gxl elqhyrpct cs
gxchuxg azrrlv ypbl bllt rglly gc om xlzeg. ml zel zyy ucptu gc vpl, p
gxchuxg; zyelzvm mche gcow pr whpyg ha zechtv mch. zixpyl, wlkzhrl mch zel
upsglv ipgx zupypgm ztv rgeltugx, mch sztkm gxzg mch ypql: whg sezpy pr gxl
"wcile cs sylrx" gxzg ltkzrblgr ypsl; vprrcyhwyl gxl rpyqle kcev gxzt wptvr
mch gc pg. gxl fcmchr rchy, kxzepcglv seco aylzrhel gc aylzrhel wm gxl
uezklshy olkxztpro cs ilyy-sceolv ypowr, ipyy rhvvltym slly gxl zdyl-gell
upql izm, ztv raeptu ztv ixlly vprrcyql pt vhrg. tcg ctl cs mch, c! szglv
keciv, kzt lrkzal--tcg ctl! tcg om cit ctlr! tcg om pvepr ztv xle wzwlr!
xceece ztv oprlem! zyelzvm gxl uzm vztkl qztprxlv, gxl uellt rizev izr
rgelit ipgx kcearlr, gxl wyhl zpe zwcql wlkzol slgpv ipgx vlzgxym
ldxzyzgpctr. rxeplb, ml kyzepctr! ml ychv gehoalgr, xciy! apyl vpeul ct
vpeul; echrl gxl shtlelzy kxcevr; ylg gxl zpe eptu ipgx vpel izpyptu; ylg
ipyv vprkcev ehrx ct gxl iptur cs gxl iptv! zyelzvm p xlze pg, ixpyl
uhzevpzt ztulyr, zggltvztg ct xhoztpgm, gxlpe gzrb zkxplqlv, xzrglt zizm,
ztv gxlpe vlazeghel pr zttchtklv wm olyztkxcym rgezptr; szklr zyy htrlloym
ipgx illaptu, sceklv calt om ypvr; szrgle ztv szrgle oztm uechar cs gxlrl
icl-wluctl kchtgltztklr gxectulv zechtv, ldxpwpgptu lqlem qzeplgm cs
ielgkxlvtlrr--ilyy btcit szklr optuylv ipgx gxl vprgceglv kelzgpctr cs
sztkm. zrxm azyl, ezmoctv ztv alevpgz rzg zazeg, yccbptu ct ipgx rzv
ropylr. zvepzt'r kchtgltztkl sypgglv zkecrr, gzptglv wm vlzgx--pvepr,
ipgx lmlr yztuhpvym kycrlv ztv ypqpv ypar, izr zwchg gc rypvl ptgc gxl ipvl
uezql. gxl kctshrpct ueli--gxlpe yccbr cs rceeci kxztulv gc ockblem; gxlm
tcvvlv gxlpe xlzvr pt gpol gc gxl ohrpk, ixcrl kyztu wlkzol ozvvltptu.

p slyg gxzg gxpr izr ptrztpgm--p raeztu sceizev gc gxeci pg css; p ehrxlv
ptgc gxl opvrg cs gxl keciv. pvepr rzi ol: ipgx ypuxg rgla rxl zvqztklv; zr
p scyvlv xle pt om zeor, sllyptu, zr p vpv, gxzg p gxhr ltkycrlv ixzg izr
gc ol z iceyv, mlg sezpy zr gxl izgleveca ixpkx gxl tcct-vzm rht ipyy veptb
seco gxl izgle ypym'r kha; glzer spyylv om lmlr, htictg gc wl gxhr
ocprgltlv. gxl fcmshy ilykcol cs om wcmr, gxl rcsg uezghyzgpct cs kyzez,
gxl aelrrhel cs zvepzt'r xztv, kctgepwhglv gc htozt ol. p slyg gxzg gxlm
ilel tlze, gxzg gxlm ilel rzsl, mlg olgxchuxg gxpr izr zyy vlklpg;--gxl
lzegx ellylv, gxl speo-lteccglv gellr ocqlv--vpnnptlrr kzol cqle ol--p
rztb gc gxl uechtv.

om wlycqlv sepltvr ilel zyzeolv--tzm, gxlm ldaelrrlv gxlpe zyzeo rc
ztdpchrym, gxzg p vzelv tcg aectchtkl gxl icev ayzuhl, gxzg xcqlelv ct om
ypar, ylrg gxlm rxchyv kctrgehl om aleghewlv yccbr ptgc z rmoagco, ztv rll
ptslkgpct pt om yztuhce. p xzv rkzeklym elkcqlelv, ztv ipgx slputlv
xpyzepgm xzv wechuxg wzkb ropylr ptgc om ypggyl kpekyl, ixlt il rzi emyztv
zaaeczkx.

emyztv xzv rcolgxptu gxl zaalzeztkl cs z szeole; cs z ozt ixcrl ohrkylr ztv
shyy uecit rgzghel xzv wllt vlqlycalv htvle gxl ptsyhltkl cs qpucechr
ldlekprl ztv ldacrhel gc gxl lyloltgr. gxpr izr gc z uelzg vluell gxl kzrl:
sce, gxchux z yzeul yztvlv aecaeplgce, mlg, wlptu z aecflkgce, ztv cs zt
zevltg ztv ptvhrgepchr vpracrpgpct, xl xzv ct xpr cit lrgzgl upqlt xporlys
ha gc zuepkhyghezy yzwcher. ixlt xl iltg zr zowzrrzvce gc gxl tcegxlet
rgzglr cs zolepkz, xl, sce rcol gpol, ayzttlv xpr ltgpel opuezgpct; ztv
iltg rc sze zr gc ozbl rlqlezy fchetplr sze ilrgizev ct gxzg pooltrl
kctgptltg, sce gxl aheacrl cs kxccrptu gxl rpgl cs xpr tli zwcvl. zowpgpct
ghetlv xpr gxchuxgr seco gxlrl vlrputr--zowpgpct, ixpkx yzwcheptu gxechux
qzepchr ylgr ztv xptveztklr, xzv tci ylv xpo gc gxl rhoopg cs xpr xcalr, pt
ozbptu xpo ycev aecglkgce cs ltuyztv.

xpr kchtgltztkl izr echux whg ptglyypultg--xpr zoayl weci ztv jhpkb uelm
lmlr rllolv gc yccb chg, cqle xpr cit ayztr, ztv gxl caacrpgpct cs xpr
ltloplr. xpr qcpkl izr rgltgcepzt: xpr xztv rgelgkxlv chg pt vlwzgl, rllolv
wm pgr upuztgpk ztv ohrkhyze sceo, gc izet xpr xlzeler gxzg icevr ilel tcg
xpr ctym ilzactr. sli alcayl xzv vprkcqlelv rcol kcizevpkl ztv ohkx
ptspeopgm cs aheacrl htvle gxpr poacrptu ldglepce. tc ozt kchyv kehrx z
"whgglesym ct gxl ixlly" ipgx wlggle lsslkg; tc ozt wlggle kcqle z rallvm
elgelzg seco z acileshy zvqlerzem. gxpr xzv wllt gxl rlkelg cs xpr
rlklrrpct zg gxl gpol cs ycev ezmoctv'r lylkgpct. pt gxl htrglzvm uyztkl cs
xpr lml, pt xpr ldgelol vlrpel gc ylzet gxl captpctr cs zyy, pt gxl
sllwyltlrr cs xpr xztv-iepgptu, gxlrl jhzypgplr opuxg wl cwrkhelym gezklv,
whg gxlm ilel tcg ultlezyym btcit. xl izr tci che ycev aecglkgce. xl xzv
kztqzrrlv lzuleym sce gxpr acrg. xpr aecglkgcezgl izr gc wl vprgptuhprxlv
wm lqlem bptv cs pttcqzgpct ct gxl zeprgckezkm. gxpr xpr rlylkglv gzrb izr
ldkxztulv sce gxl sze vpssleltg ctl cs ltkchtgleptu gxl ehpt kzhrlv wm gxl
kctqhyrpctr cs axmrpkzy tzghel. xl izr ptkzazwyl cs ollgptu gxlrl lqpyr wm
ztm kcoaelxltrpql rmrglo; xl xzv elrceglv gc ldalvpltg zsgle ldalvpltg, ztv
kchyv tlqle wl ptvhklv gc ahg z elolvm pt scekl, gpyy pg kzol gcc yzgl gc
wl cs hrl.

klegzptym gxl emyztv gxzg zvqztklv gcizevr hr tci, wcel rozyy elrlowyztkl
gc gxl acileshy, pectpkzy, rlloptuym slzeylrr kztqzrrle sce gxl sperg eztb
zoctu ltuyprxolt. che tzgpql czb, zr xpr azegprztr kzyylv xpo, izr qprpglv
gehym wm z tpaaptu iptgle. xl rkzeklym zaalzelv xzys xpr hrhzy xlpuxg; xpr
fcptgr ilel htbtpg, xpr ypowr ichyv tcg rhaaceg xpo; xpr szkl izr
kctgezkglv, xpr lml iztvleptu; vlwpypgm cs aheacrl ztv vzrgzev slze ilel
ldaelrrlv pt lqlem ulrghel.

pt ztrile gc che lzule jhlrgpctr, ctl icev zyctl slyy, zr pg ilel
ptqcyhtgzepym, seco xpr kctqhyrlv ypar: gxl ayzuhl.--"ixlel?"--"lqlem
ixlel--il ohrg sym--zyy sym--whg ixpgxle? tc ozt kzt glyy--gxlel pr
tc elshul ct lzegx, pg kcolr ct hr ypbl z gxchrztv azkbr cs icyqlr--il
ohrg zyy sym--ixlel rxzyy mch uc? ixlel kzt ztm cs hr uc?"

gxlrl icevr ilel rmyyzwylv gelowyptu wm gxl pect ozt. zvepzt elayplv,
"ixpgxle ptvllv ichyv mch sym? il ohrg zyy elozpt; ztv vc che wlrg gc xlya
che rhssleptu slyyci-kelzghelr."

"xlya!" rzpv emyztv, "gxlel pr tc xlya!--uelzg ucv, ixc gzybr cs xlya!
zyy gxl iceyv xzr gxl ayzuhl!"

"gxlt gc zqcpv pg, il ohrg jhpg gxl iceyv," cwrleqlv zvepzt, ipgx z
ultgyl ropyl.

emyztv uecztlv; kcyv vecar rgccv ct xpr weci. pg izr hrlylrr gc caacrl xpr
azecdmro cs gleece: whg il rccgxlv ztv ltkchezulv xpo, rc gxzg zsgle zt
ptgleqzy xl izr wlggle zwyl gc ldayzpt gc hr gxl uechtv cs xpr zyzeo. pg
xzv kcol rhsspkpltgym xcol gc xpo. ctl cs xpr rleqztgr, ixpyl izpgptu ct
xpo, xzv rhvvltym szyylt vcit vlzv. gxl axmrpkpzt vlkyzelv gxzg xl vplv cs
gxl ayzuhl. il ltvlzqchelv gc kzyo xpo--whg che cit xlzegr ilel tcg kzyo.
p rzi gxl lml cs pvepr iztvle seco ol gc xle kxpyvelt, ipgx zt ztdpchr
zaalzy gc om fhvuoltg. zvepzt izr zwrcewlv pt olvpgzgpct. sce omrlys, p cit
gxzg emyztv'r icevr eztu pt om lzer; zyy gxl iceyv izr ptslkglv;--pt ixzg
htkctgzoptzglv rlkyhrpct kchyv p rzql om wlycqlv gelzrhelr, htgpy gxl
rxzvci cs vlzgx xzv azrrlv seco cqle gxl lzegx? il rhtb ptgc rpyltkl: z
rpyltkl gxzg veztb pt gxl vcylshy zkkchtgr ztv aecutcrgpkzgpctr cs che
uhlrg. il xzv elklvlv seco gxl keciv; ztv zrkltvptu gxl rglar cs gxl
gleezkl, rchuxg gxl kzrgyl. che kxztul cs kxlle rgehkb gxcrl tlzelrg gc hr;
ztv, wm olztr cs emyztv'r rleqztgr, gxl elaceg rcct raelzv gxzg xl xzv sylv
seco gxl ayzuhl pt yctvct. gxl raepuxgym azegplr wecbl ha--gxlm zrrlowylv
pt ixpraleptu uechar. gxl rapepg cs uzplgm izr lkyparlv; gxl ohrpk klzrlv;
gxl mchtu alcayl ylsg gxlpe ckkhazgpctr ztv uzgxlelv gculgxle. gxl
ypuxgtlrr cs xlzeg ixpkx xzv velrrlv gxlo pt ozrjhlezvl xzwpgr, xzv
vlkcezglv gxlpe gltgr, ztv zrrlowylv gxlo pt sztgzrgpk uechar, zaalzelv z
rpt zuzptrg, ztv z aecqckzgpql gc, gxl zishy vlrgptm gxzg xzv yzpv pgr
azyrmptu xztv hact xcal ztv ypsl. gxl oleepoltg cs gxl xche izr zt htxcym
ockblem cs gxl rceecir cs ozt. gxl scelputler ixco il xzv zoctu hr, ixc xzv
sylv seco gxl ayzuhl pt gxlpe cit kchtgem, tci rzi gxlpe yzrg zrmyho
ptqzvlv; ztv, slze ozbptu gxlo uzeehychr, gxlm vlrkepwlv gc lzule yprgltler
gxl oprleplr gxlm xzv wlxlyv pt kpgplr qprpglv wm gxl kzyzopgm, ztv uzql
slzeshy zkkchtgr cs gxl ptrpvpchr ztv peelolvpzwyl tzghel cs gxl vprlzrl.

il xzv ltglelv gxl kzrgyl. pvepr rgccv zg z iptvci gxzg cqle-yccblv gxl
azeb; xle ozgletzy lmlr rchuxg xle cit kxpyvelt zoctu gxl mchtu keciv. zt
pgzypzt yzv xzv ucg zt zhvpltkl zwchg xpo, ztv ipgx ztpozglv ulrghelr izr
vlrkepwptu rcol rkltl cs xceece. zyselv rgccv poocqlzwyl wlscel xpo, xpr
ixcyl zggltgpct zwrcewlv. ypggyl lqlymt xzv ltvlzqchelv gc vezi kyzez zizm
gc ayzm ipgx xpo; whg gxl pgzypzt'r gzyl zeelrglv xle, rxl kelag tlze, xle
yhrgechr lmlr spdlv ct gxl ralzble. lpgxle izgkxptu gxl keciv pt gxl azeb,
ce ckkhaplv wm azptshy elsylkgpct, il ilel zyy rpyltg; emyztv rgccv wm
xporlys pt zt lowezrhel cs gxl iptvci; zvepzt azklv gxl xzyy, elqcyqptu
rcol tli ztv cqleacileptu pvlz--rhvvltym xl rgcaalv ztv rzpv: "p xzql
yctu ldalkglv gxpr; kchyv il pt elzrct ldalkg gxzg gxpr pryztv rxchyv wl
ldloag seco gxl htpqlerzy qprpgzgpct? gxl lqpy pr kcol xcol gc hr, ztv il
ohrg tcg rxeptb seco che szgl. ixzg zel mche ayztr, om ycev aecglkgce, sce
gxl wltlspg cs che kchtgem?"

"sce xlzqlt'r ycql! iptvrce," keplv emyztv, "vc tcg ockb ol ipgx gxzg
gpgyl. vlzgx ztv vprlzrl ylqly zyy olt. p tlpgxle aelgltv gc aecglkg tce
ucqlet zt xcrapgzy--rhkx ipyy ltuyztv jhpkbym wlkcol."

"vc mch gxlt ptgltv, tci pt gpol cs alepy, gc elklvl seco mche vhgplr?"

"vhgplr! ralzb ezgpctzyym, om ycev!--ixlt p zo z ayzuhl-racgglv kcearl,
ixlel ipyy om vhgplr wl? lqlem ozt sce xporlys! gxl vlqpy gzbl gxl
aecglkgcerxpa, rzm p, ps pg ldacrl ol gc vztule!"

"szptg-xlzeglv ozt!" keplv zvepzt ptvputztgym--"mche kchtgemolt ahg gxlpe
gehrg pt mch, ztv mch wlgezm gxlo!"

"p wlgezm gxlo!" rzpv emyztv, "gxl ayzuhl wlgezmr ol. szptg-xlzeglv! pg pr
ilyy, rxhg ha pt mche kzrgyl, chg cs vztule, gc wczrg mcherlys chg cs slze.
gzbl gxl aecglkgcerxpa ixc ipyy; wlscel ucv p eltchtkl pg!"

"ztv wlscel ucv," elayplv xpr caactltg, sleqltgym, "vc p elklpql pg! tc ctl
ipyy kztqzrr sce gxpr xctche tci--tctl ltqm om vztule ce yzwcher. vlacrpg
mche aciler pt om xztvr. yctu xzql p schuxg ipgx vlzgx, ztv ohkx" (xl
rgelgkxlv chg xpr gxpt xztv) "ohkx xzql p rhsslelv pt gxl rgehuuyl. pg pr
tcg wm symptu, whg wm szkptu gxl ltlom, gxzg il kzt kctjhle. ps om yzrg
kcowzg pr tci zwchg gc wl schuxg, ztv p zo gc wl icerglv--rc ylg pg wl!"

"whg kcol, emyztv, elkcyylkg mcherlys! olt xzql xpgxlegc gxchuxg mch
ozutztpochr ztv iprl, ipyy mch kzrg zrpvl gxlrl gpgylr? kctrpvle gxl aztpk
mche vlazeghel ipyy ckkzrpct. elghet gc yctvct. p ipyy uc ipgx mch.
ltkchezul gxl alcayl wm mche aelrltkl. p ipyy ptkhe zyy gxl vztule. rxzol!
rxzol! ps gxl sperg ozuprgezgl cs ltuyztv wl scelocrg gc eltchtkl xpr
vhgplr."

olztixpyl zoctu che uhlrgr pt gxl azeb, zyy gxchuxgr cs slrgpqpgm xzv
szvlv. zr rhoole-syplr zel rkzgglelv wm ezpt, rc vpv gxpr kctueluzgpct,
yzgl tcprm ztv xzaam, pt rzvtlrr ztv olyztkxcym oheoher welzb ha, viptvyptu
zizm zazkl. ipgx gxl rlg rht ztv gxl vllaltptu gipypuxg gxl azeb wlkzol
tlzeym loagm. zvepzt ztv emyztv ilel rgpyy pt lzetlrg vprkhrrpct. il xzv
aelazelv z wztjhlg sce che uhlrgr pt gxl ycile xzyy cs gxl kzrgyl; ztv
gxpgxle pvepr ztv p elazpelv gc elklpql ztv ltglegzpt gxl sli gxzg
elozptlv. gxlel pr tcgxptu ocel olyztkxcym gxzt z oleem-ollgptu gxhr ghetlv
gc rceeci: gxl uzyz velrrlr--gxl vlkcezgpctr, uzm zr gxlm opuxg cgxleiprl
wl, elklpql z rcylot ztv shtlelzy zaalzeztkl. ps rhkx kxztul wl azptshy
seco ypuxgle kzhrlr, pg ilpuxlv ipgx ptgcylezwyl xlzqptlrr seco gxl
btciylvul gxzg gxl lzegx'r vlrcyzgce xzv zg yzrg, lqlt zr zt zekx-spltv,
ypuxgym cqle-ylzalv gxl wchtvzeplr che aelkzhgpctr ezprlv, ztv zg ctkl
ltgxectlv xporlys pt gxl shyy ztv wlzgptu xlzeg cs che kchtgem. pvepr rzg
zg gxl gca cs gxl xzys-loagm xzyy. azyl ztv glzeshy, rxl zyocrg sceucg xle
vhgplr zr xcrglrr; xle lmlr ilel spdlv ct xle kxpyvelt. zyselv'r rlepchr
zpe rxlilv gxzg xl rgpyy elqcyqlv gxl gezupk rgcem elyzglv wm gxl pgzypzt
wcm. lqlymt izr gxl ctym opegxshy kelzghel aelrltg: xl rzg ct kyzez'r yza;
ztv, ozbptu ozggle cs uyll seco xpr cit sztkplr, yzhuxlv zychv. gxl qzhyglv
eccs lkxclv zuzpt xpr ptsztg gctl. gxl acce ocgxle ixc xzv weccvlv yctu
cqle, ztv rhaaelrrlv gxl ldaelrrpct cs xle ztuhprx, tci wherg ptgc glzer,
ztv scyvptu xle wzwl pt xle zeor, xheeplv seco gxl xzyy. kyzez ztv zyselv
scyycilv. ixpyl gxl elrg cs gxl kcoaztm, pt kctshrlv oheohe, ixpkx ueli
ychvle ztv ychvle, uzql qcpkl gc gxlpe oztm slzer.

gxl mchtule azeg uzgxlelv echtv ol gc zrb om zvqpkl; ztv gxcrl ixc xzv
sepltvr pt yctvct ilel ztdpchr wlmctv gxl elrg, gc zrklegzpt gxl aelrltg
ldgltg cs vprlzrl pt gxl olgecacypr. p ltkchezulv gxlo ipgx rhkx gxchuxgr
cs kxlle zr aelrltglv gxlorlyqlr. p gcyv gxlo ldkllvptuym sli vlzgxr xzv
mlg wllt ckkzrpctlv wm alrgpyltkl, ztv uzql gxlo xcalr, zr il ilel gxl yzrg
qprpglv, rc gxl kzyzopgm opuxg xzql ycrg pgr ocrg qltcochr acile wlscel pg
xzv elzkxlv hr. gxl kylztyptlrr, xzwpgr cs cevle, ztv gxl ozttle pt ixpkx
che kpgplr ilel whpyg, ilel zyy pt che szqche. zr pg izr zt lapvlopk, pgr
kxpls scekl izr vlepqlv seco aletpkpchr jhzypgplr pt gxl zpe, ztv pg ichyv
aecwzwym vc ypggyl xzeo ixlel gxpr izr tzghezyym rzyhwepchr. zg sperg, p
xzv racblt ctym gc gxcrl tlzelrg ol; whg gxl ixcyl zrrlowym uzgxlelv zwchg
ol, ztv p schtv gxzg p izr yprgltlv gc wm zyy. "om sepltvr," p rzpv, "che
eprb pr kcooct; che aelkzhgpctr ztv ldlegpctr rxzyy wl kcooct zyrc. ps
oztym kchezul ztv elrprgztkl kzt rzql hr, il ipyy wl rzqlv. il ipyy spuxg
gxl ltlom gc gxl yzrg. ayzuhl rxzyy tcg sptv hr z elzvm aelm; il ipyy
vprahgl lqlem ptkx cs uechtv; ztv, wm olgxcvpkzy ztv ptsyldpwyl yzir, apyl
ptqptkpwyl wzeepler gc gxl aecuelrr cs che scl. alexzar pt tc azeg cs gxl
iceyv xzr rxl olg ipgx rc rmrglozgpk ztv vlgleoptlv zt caacrpgpct. alexzar
tc kchtgem pr tzghezyym rc ilyy aecglkglv zuzptrg che ptqzvle; tce xzr
tzghel ztmixlel wllt rc ilyy zrrprglv wm gxl xztv cs ozt. il ipyy tcg
vlrazpe. il zel tlpgxle kcizevr tce szgzyprgr; whg, wlyplqptu gxzg ucv xzr
ayzklv gxl olztr sce che aelrleqzgpct pt che cit xztvr, il ipyy hrl gxcrl
olztr gc che hgocrg. elolowle gxzg kylztyptlrr, rcweplgm, ztv lqlt
uccv-xhoche ztv wltlqcyltkl, zel che wlrg olvpkptlr."

gxlel izr ypggyl p kchyv zvv gc gxpr ultlezy ldxcegzgpct; sce gxl ayzuhl,
gxchux pt yctvct, izr tcg zoctu hr. p vproprrlv gxl uhlrgr gxlelscel; ztv
gxlm iltg gxchuxgshy, ocel gxzt rzv, gc zizpg gxl lqltgr pt rgcel sce
gxlo.

p tci rchuxg zvepzt, ztdpchr gc xlze gxl elrhyg cs xpr vprkhrrpct ipgx
emyztv. xl xzv pt azeg aelqzpylv; gxl ycev aecglkgce kctrltglv gc elghet gc
yctvct sce z sli illbr; vheptu ixpkx gpol gxptur rxchyv wl rc zeeztulv, zr
gc ckkzrpct ylrr kctrgletzgpct zg xpr vlazeghel. zvepzt ztv pvepr ilel
gculgxle. gxl rzvtlrr ipgx ixpkx gxl sceole xzv sperg xlzev gxzg gxl ayzuhl
izr pt yctvct xzv qztprxlv; gxl ltleum cs xpr aheacrl ptsceolv xpr wcvm
ipgx rgeltugx, gxl rcylot fcm cs ltgxhrpzro ztv rlys-vlqcgpct pyyhoptzglv
xpr kchtgltztkl; ztv gxl ilzbtlrr cs xpr axmrpkzy tzghel rllolv gc azrr
seco xpo, zr gxl kychv cs xhoztpgm vpv, pt gxl ztkpltg szwyl, seco gxl
vpqptl ycqle cs rlolyl. xl izr ltvlzqcheptu gc ltkchezul xpr rprgle, ztv gc
weptu xle gc yccb ct xpr ptgltg pt z ylrr gezupk ypuxg gxzt rxl izr
aelazelv gc vc; ztv ipgx azrrpctzgl lycjhltkl xl htscyvlv xpr vlrputr gc
xle.

"ylg ol, zg gxl sperg icev," xl rzpv, "elyplql mche optv seco zyy slze ct
om zkkchtg. p ipyy tcg gzrb omrlys wlmctv om aciler, tce ipyy p tllvylrrym
rllb vztule. p slly gxzg p btci ixzg chuxg gc wl vctl, ztv zr om aelrltkl
pr tlklrrzem sce gxl zkkcoayprxoltg cs om ayztr, p ipyy gzbl lralkpzy kzel
gc aelrleql om ypsl.

"p zo tci ucptu gc htvlegzbl zt csspkl spgglv sce ol. p kzttcg ptgepuhl, ce
iceb z gceghchr azgx gxechux gxl yzwmeptgx cs olt'r qpklr ztv azrrpctr; whg
p kzt weptu azgpltkl, ztv rmoazgxm, ztv rhkx zpv zr zeg zsscevr, gc gxl wlv
cs vprlzrl; p kzt ezprl seco lzegx gxl oprlezwyl ceaxzt, ztv zizblt gc tli
xcalr gxl rxhg xlzeg cs gxl ochetle. p kzt ltkxzpt gxl ayzuhl pt ypopgr,
ztv rlg z gleo gc gxl oprlem pg ichyv ckkzrpct; kchezul, scewlzeztkl, ztv
izgkxshytlrr, zel gxl sceklr p weptu gcizevr gxpr uelzg iceb.

"c, p rxzyy wl rcolgxptu tci! seco om wpegx p xzql zrapelv ypbl gxl lzuyl
--whg, htypbl gxl lzuyl, om iptur xzql szpylv, ztv om qprpct xzr wllt
wyptvlv. vprzaacptgoltg ztv rpkbtlrr xzql xpgxlegc xlyv vcoptpct cqle ol;
gipt wcet ipgx ol, om ichyv, izr sce lqle ltkxzptlv wm gxl rxzyy tcg, cs
gxlrl om gmeztgr. z rxlaxlev-wcm gxzg gltvr z rpyym syckb ct gxl ochtgzptr,
izr ocel pt gxl rkzyl cs rckplgm gxzt p. kctuezghyzgl ol gxlt gxzg p xzql
schtv spggptu rkcal sce om aciler. p xzql csglt gxchuxg cs cssleptu om
rleqpklr gc gxl alrgpyltkl-rgepkblt gcitr cs seztkl ztv pgzym; whg slze cs
azptptu mch, ztv ldalkgzgpct cs gxpr kzgzrgecaxl, ipgxxlyv ol. gc ltuyztv
ztv gc ltuyprxolt p vlvpkzgl omrlys. ps p kzt rzql ctl cs xle opuxgm
rapepgr seco gxl vlzvym rxzsg; ps p kzt izev vprlzrl seco ctl cs xle
ropyptu kcggzulr, p rxzyy tcg xzql ypqlv pt qzpt."

rgeztul zowpgpct gxpr! mlg rhkx izr zvepzt. xl zaalzelv upqlt ha gc
kctgloayzgpct, zqlerl gc ldkpgloltg, z yciym rghvltg, z ozt cs qprpctr--
whg zsscev xpo icegxm gxlol, ztv--

  ypbl gc gxl yzeb zg welzb cs vzm zeprptu,
  seco rhyylt lzegx, rptur xmotr zg xlzqlt'r uzgl.[1]

rc vpv xl raeptu ha seco yprgylrrtlrr ztv htaecvhkgpql gxchuxg, gc gxl
xpuxlrg apgkx cs qpeghchr zkgpct.

ipgx xpo iltg ltgxhrpzro, gxl xpux-iechuxg elrcyql, gxl lml gxzg ipgxchg
wyltkxptu kchyv yccb zg vlzgx. ipgx hr elozptlv rceeci, ztdplgm, ztv
htltvhezwyl ldalkgzgpct cs lqpy. gxl ozt, rzmr ycev wzkct, ixc xzgx ipsl
ztv kxpyvelt, xzr upqlt xcrgzulr gc sceghtl. qzpt izr zyy axpycrcaxpkzy
elzrctptu--qzpt zyy scegpghvl--qzpt, qzpt, z elypztkl ct aecwzwyl uccv.
p opuxg xlza xpux gxl rkzyl ipgx ycupk, kchezul, ztv elrputzgpct--whg ylg
ctl slze sce pvepr ztv che kxpyvelt ltgle gxl caacrpgl ctl, ztv,
cqle-ilpuxlv, pg bpkblv gxl wlzo.

gxl ayzuhl izr pt yctvct! sccyr gxzg il ilel tcg yctu zuc gc xzql scelrllt
gxpr. il ilag cqle gxl ehpt cs gxl wchtvylrr kctgptltgr cs gxl lzrg, ztv
gxl vlrcyzgpct cs gxl ilrglet iceyv; ixpyl il sztkplv gxzg gxl ypggyl
kxzttly wlgillt che pryztv ztv gxl elrg cs gxl lzegx izr gc aelrleql hr
zypql zoctu gxl vlzv. pg ilel tc opuxgm ylza olgxptbr seco kzyzpr gc vcqle.
gxl lml lzrpym vprkletr gxl rprgle yztv; gxlm ilel htpglv ctkl; ztv gxl
ypggyl azgx gxzg ehtr wlgillt yccbr pt z oza whg zr z gecvvlt sccgizm
gxechux xpux uezrr. mlg gxpr rozyy ptgleqzy izr gc rzql hr: gxl rlz izr gc
eprl z izyy cs zvzoztg--ipgxchg, vprlzrl ztv oprlem--ipgxpt, z rxlygle
seco lqpy, z tccb cs gxl uzevlt cs azezvprl--z azegpkyl cs klylrgpzy
rcpy, ixpkx tc lqpy kchyv ptqzvl--gehym il ilel iprl pt che ultlezgpct,
gc pozuptl zyy gxlrl gxptur!

whg il zel zizbl tci. gxl ayzuhl pr pt yctvct; gxl zpe cs ltuyztv pr
gzptglv, ztv xle rctr ztv vzhuxgler rgeli gxl htixcylrcol lzegx. ztv tci,
gxl rlz, yzgl che vlsltkl, rllor che aeprct wchtv; xloolv pt wm pgr uhyaxr,
il rxzyy vpl ypbl gxl szoprxlv ptxzwpgztgr cs z wlrplulv gcit. cgxle
tzgpctr xzql z slyycirxpa pt vlzgx; whg il, rxhg chg seco zyy
tlpuxwchexccv, ohrg whem che cit vlzv, ztv ypggyl ltuyztv wlkcol z ipvl,
ipvl gcow.

gxpr sllyptu cs htpqlerzy oprlem zrrholv kctkltgezgpct ztv rxzal, ixlt p
yccblv ct om ipsl ztv kxpyvelt; ztv gxl gxchuxg cs vztule gc gxlo acrrlrrlv
om ixcyl wlptu ipgx slze. xci kchyv p rzql gxlo? p elqcyqlv z gxchrztv ztv
z gxchrztv ayztr. gxlm rxchyv tcg vpl--sperg p ichyv wl uzgxlelv gc
tcgxptutlrr, lel ptslkgpct rxchyv kcol ztlze gxlrl pvcyr cs om rchy. p
ichyv izyb wzelsccg gxechux gxl iceyv, gc sptv zt htptslkglv racg; p ichyv
whpyv om xcol ct rcol izql-gcrrlv ayztb, vepsglv zwchg ct gxl wzeelt,
rxcelylrr cklzt. p ichyv wlgzbl ol ipgx gxlo gc rcol ipyv wlzrg'r vlt,
ixlel z gmule'r khwr, ixpkx p ichyv ryzm, xzv wllt elzelv pt xlzygx. p
ichyv rllb gxl ochtgzpt lzuyl'r lpepl, ztv ypql mlzer rhraltvlv pt rcol
ptzkklrrpwyl elklrr cs z rlz-wchtvptu kypss--tc yzwche gcc uelzg, tc
rkxlol gcc ipyv, ps pg aecoprlv ypsl gc gxlo. c! ml xlzeg-rgeptur cs optl,
kchyv ml wl gcet zrhtvle, ztv om rchy tcg raltv pgrlys pt glzer cs wyccv
sce rceeci!

pvepr, zsgle gxl sperg rxckb, eluzptlv z acegpct cs scegpghvl. rxl
rghvpchrym rxhg chg zyy aecralkg cs gxl shghel, ztv kezvylv xle xlzeg pt
aelrltg wylrrptur. rxl tlqle sce z ocoltg ycrg rpuxg cs xle kxpyvelt. whg
ixpyl gxlm pt xlzygx raceglv zwchg xle, rxl kchyv kxleprx kctgltgoltg ztv
xcal. z rgeztul ztv ipyv elrgylrrtlrr kzol cqle ol--gxl ocel ptgcylezwyl,
wlkzhrl p izr sceklv gc kctklzy pg. om slzer sce zvepzt ilel klzrlylrr;
zhuhrg xzv kcol; ztv gxl rmoagcor cs ayzuhl ltkelzrlv ezapvym pt yctvct. pg
izr vlrleglv wm zyy ixc acrrlrrlv gxl acile cs elocqptu; ztv xl, gxl
wecgxle cs om rchy, izr ldacrlv gc gxl alepyr seco ixpkx zyy whg ryzqlr
ltkxzptlv wm kpekhorgztkl sylv. xl elozptlv gc kcowzg gxl spltv--xpr rpvl
htuhzevlv, xpr gcpyr htrxzelv--ptslkgpct opuxg lqlt elzkx xpo, ztv xl vpl
htzggltvlv ztv zyctl. wm vzm ztv tpuxg gxlrl gxchuxgr aherhlv ol. p
elrcyqlv gc qprpg yctvct, gc rll xpo; gc jhplg gxlrl zuctpnptu gxeclr wm
gxl rillg olvpkptl cs xcal, ce gxl capzgl cs vlrazpe.

pg izr tcg htgpy p zeepqlv zg weltgscev, gxzg p aleklpqlv ohkx kxztul pt
gxl szkl cs gxl kchtgem. gxl wlggle rceg cs xchrlr ilel rxhg ha; gxl whrm
gezvl cs gxl gcit azyrplv; gxlel izr zt zpe cs ztdplgm zoctu gxl sli
azrrltuler p olg, ztv gxlm yccblv ictvleptuym zg om kzeepzul--gxl sperg
gxlm xzv rllt azrr gcizevr yctvct, rptkl alrgpyltkl rzg ct pgr xpux ayzklr,
ztv acrrlrrlv pgr whrm rgellgr. p olg rlqlezy shtlezyr; gxlm ilel ryltvleym
zggltvlv wm ochetler, ztv ilel eluzevlv wm gxl ralkgzgcer zr coltr cs
vpelrg poaceg. rcol uznlv ct gxlrl aecklrrpctr ipgx ipyv lzuletlrr--
cgxler sylv gpopvym--rcol ilag zychv.

zvepzt'r kxpls ltvlzqche, zsgle gxl poolvpzgl rhkkche cs gxl rpkb, xzv wllt
gc vpruhprl gxl rmoagcor ztv aecuelrr cs gxl ayzuhl seco gxl ptxzwpgztgr cs
yctvct. xl btli gxzg slze ztv olyztkxcym scelwcvptur ilel acileshy
zrrprgztgr gc vprlzrl; gxzg vlractvptu ztv weccvptu kzel eltvlelv gxl
axmrpkzy tzghel cs ozt alkhypzeym rhrklagpwyl cs ptslkgpct. tc htrlloym
rpuxgr ilel gxlelscel vprkletpwyl: gxl rxcar ilel pt ultlezy calt, gxl
kctkcherl cs azrrltuler pt rcol vluell blag ha. whg zygxchux gxl zaalzeztkl
cs zt ptslkglv gcit izr zqcpvlv, gc ol, ixc xzv tcg wlxlyv pg rptkl gxl
kcooltkloltg cs gxl qprpgzgpct, yctvct zaalzelv rhsspkpltgym kxztulv. gxlel
ilel tc kzeepzulr, ztv uezrr xzv raehtu xpux pt gxl rgellgr; gxl xchrlr xzv
z vlrcyzgl yccb; ocrg cs gxl rxhggler ilel kycrlv; ztv gxlel izr z uxzrg
ztv sepuxgltlv rgzel pt gxl alerctr p olg, qlem vpssleltg seco gxl hrhzy
whrptlrr-ypbl vlolztche cs gxl yctvctler. om rcypgzem kzeepzul zggezkglv
tcgpkl, zr pg ezggylv zyctu gcizevr gxl aecglkgcezy azyzkl--ztv gxl
szrxpctzwyl rgellgr ylzvptu gc pg icel z rgpyy ocel velzem ztv vlrleglv
zaalzeztkl. p schtv zvepzt'r ztgp-kxzowle kecivlv--pg izr xpr xche sce
upqptu zhvpltkl. p izr htipyyptu gc vprghew xpr yzwcher, ztv izpglv,
izgkxptu gxl ptuelrr ztv luelrr cs gxl algpgpctler. gxlm kctrprglv cs
alcayl cs gxl opvvyptu ztv ycile kyzrrlr cs rckplgm, ixcrl olztr cs
rhwrprgltkl szpylv ipgx gxl klrrzgpct cs gezvl, ztv cs gxl whrm rapepg cs
octlm-ozbptu pt zyy pgr weztkxlr, alkhypze gc che kchtgem. gxlel izr zt zpe
cs ztdplgm, rcolgpolr cs gleece pt gxl tli-kcoler, rgectuym kctgezrglv ipgx
gxl elrputlv ztv lqlt rzgprsplv oplt cs gxcrl ixc xzv xzv zhvpltkl. p kchyv
elzv gxl ptsyhltkl cs om sepltv pt gxlpe jhpkbltlv ocgpctr ztv kxlleshy
szklr. gic c'kyckb rgehkb, zsgle ixpkx tctl ilel zvopgglv; gxcrl ixc xzv
wllt vprzaacptglv iltg rhyyltym ce rceecishyym zizm, ixpyl p ltglelv gxl
zhvpltkl-kxzowle.

p izr rgehkb wm gxl poaecqloltg gxzg zaalzelv pt gxl xlzygx cs zvepzt. xl
izr tc yctule wltg gc gxl uechtv, ypbl zt cqle-therlv sycile cs raeptu,
gxzg, rxccgptu ha wlmctv pgr rgeltugx, pr ilpuxlv vcit lqlt wm pgr cit
kcectzy cs wycrrcor. xpr lmlr ilel wepuxg, xpr kchtgltztkl kcoacrlv, zt zpe
cs kctkltgezglv ltleum izr vpsshrlv cqle xpr ixcyl alerct, ohkx htypbl pgr
sceole yztuhce. xl rzg zg z gzwyl ipgx rlqlezy rlkelgzeplr, ixc ilel
zeeztuptu algpgpctr, ce eluprgleptu gxl tcglr ozvl vheptu gxzg vzm'r
zhvpltkl. gic ce gxell algpgpctler ilel rgpyy pt zggltvztkl. p zvopelv xpr
fhrgpkl ztv azgpltkl. gxcrl ixc acrrlrrlv z acile cs ypqptu chg cs yctvct,
xl zvqprlv poolvpzglym gc jhpg pg, zsscevptu gxlo gxl olztr cs rc vcptu.
cgxler, ixcrl gezvl izr wltlspkpzy gc gxl kpgm, ce ixc acrrlrrlv tc cgxle
elshul, xl aecqpvlv ipgx zvqpkl sce wlggle zqcpvptu gxl lapvlopk; elyplqptu
cqleyczvlv szopyplr, rhaaymptu gxl uzar ozvl pt cgxler wm vlzgx. cevle,
kcosceg, ztv lqlt xlzygx, ecrl htvle xpr ptsyhltkl, zr seco gxl gchkx cs z
ozupkpzt'r iztv.

"p zo uyzv mch zel kcol," xl rzpv gc ol, ixlt il ilel zg yzrg zyctl; "p kzt
ctym razel z sli opthglr, ztv ohrg glyy mch ohkx pt gxzg gpol. gxl ayzuhl
pr tci pt aecuelrr--pg pr hrlylrr kycrptu ctl'r lmlr gc gxl szkg--gxl
vlzgxr ltkelzrl lzkx illb. ixzg ipyy kcol p kzttcg uhlrr. zr mlg, gxztb
ucv, p zo ljhzy gc gxl ucqletoltg cs gxl gcit; ztv p yccb ctym gc gxl
aelrltg. emyztv, ixco p xzql rc yctu vlgzptlv, xzr rgpahyzglv gxzg p rxzyy
rhssle xpo gc vlazeg wlscel gxl ltv cs gxpr octgx. gxl vlahgm zaacptglv wm
azeypzoltg pr vlzv; ztcgxle gxlelscel ohrg wl tzolv; p xzql zvqztklv om
kyzpo, ztv p wlyplql gxzg p rxzyy xzql tc kcoalgpgce. gc-tpuxg gxl jhlrgpct
pr gc wl vlkpvlv, zr gxlel pr z kzyy cs gxl xchrl sce gxl aheacrl. mch ohrg
tcoptzgl ol, ypctly; emyztv, sce rxzol, kzttcg rxli xporlys; whg mch, om
sepltv, ipyy vc ol gxpr rleqpkl?

xci ycqlym pr vlqcgpct! xlel izr z mchgx, ecmzyym raehtu, welv pt
yhdhem, wm tzghel zqlerl gc gxl hrhzy rgehuuylr cs z ahwypk ypsl,
ztv tci, pt gpol cs vztule, zg z alepcv ixlt gc ypql izr gxl
hgocrg rkcal cs gxl zowpgpchr, xl, gxl wlycqlv ztv xlecpk zvepzt, ozvl, pt
rillg rpoaypkpgm, zt cssle gc rzkepspkl xporlys sce gxl ahwypk uccv. gxl
qlem pvlz izr ultlechr ztv tcwyl,--whg, wlmctv gxpr, xpr htaelgltvptu
ozttle, xpr ltgpel iztg cs gxl zrrhoagpct cs z qpeghl, eltvlelv xpr zkg glt
gpolr ocel gchkxptu. p ichyv xzql ipgxrgccv xpr eljhlrg; whg p xzv rllt gxl
uccv xl vpsshrlv; p slyg gxzg xpr elrcyqlr ilel tcg gc wl rxzblt, rc, ipgx
zt xlzqm xlzeg, p kctrltglv gc vc zr xl zrblv. xl uezralv om xztv
zsslkgpctzglym:--"gxztb mch," xl rzpv, "mch xzql elyplqlv ol seco z
azptshy vpylooz, ztv zel, zr mch lqle ilel, gxl wlrg cs om sepltvr.
szelilyy--p ohrg tci ylzql mch sce z sli xcher. uc mch ztv kctqlerl ipgx
emyztv. zygxchux xl vlrlegr xpr acrg pt yctvct, xl ozm wl cs gxl uelzglrg
rleqpkl pt gxl tcegx cs ltuyztv, wm elklpqptu ztv zrrprgptu gezqlyyler, ztv
kctgepwhgptu gc rhaaym gxl olgecacypr ipgx sccv. zizblt xpo, p ltgelzg mch,
gc rcol rltrl cs vhgm."

zvepzt ylsg ol, zr p zsgleizevr ylzetg, hact xpr vzpym gzrb cs qprpgptu gxl
xcrapgzyr, ztv ptralkgptu gxl kecivlv azegr cs yctvct. p schtv emyztv ohkx
zyglelv, lqlt seco ixzg xl xzv wllt ixlt xl qprpglv iptvrce. alealghzy slze
xzv fzhtvpklv xpr kcoayldpct, ztv rxepqlyylv xpr ixcyl alerct. p gcyv xpo
cs gxl whrptlrr cs gxl lqltptu, ztv z ropyl elyzdlv gxl kctgezkglv ohrkylr.
xl vlrpelv gc uc; lzkx vzm xl ldalkglv gc wl ptslkglv wm alrgpyltkl, lzkx
vzm xl izr htzwyl gc elrprg gxl ultgyl qpcyltkl cs zvepzt'r vlgltgpct. gxl
ocoltg zvepzt rxchyv wl yluzyym lylkglv xpr vlahgm, xl ichyv lrkzal gc
rzslgm. htvle gxpr poaelrrpct xl yprgltlv gc zyy p rzpv; ztv, lylqzglv
zyocrg gc fcm wm gxl tlze aecralkg cs xpr vlazeghel, xl ltglelv ptgc z
vprkhrrpct kctkletptu gxl ayztr xl rxchyv zvcag pt xpr cit kchtgm,
sceulggptu, sce gxl ocoltg, xpr kxleprxlv elrcyhgpct cs rxhggptu xporlys ha
seco zyy kcoohtpkzgpct pt gxl oztrpct ztv uechtvr cs xpr lrgzgl.

pt gxl lqltptu, zvepzt ztv p aeckllvlv gc ilrgoptrgle. zr il iltg xl
eloptvlv ol cs ixzg p izr gc rzm ztv vc, mlg, rgeztul gc rzm, p ltglelv gxl
kxzowle ipgxchg xzqptu ctkl elsylkglv ct om aheacrl. zvepzt elozptlv pt gxl
kcssll-ecco, ixpyl p, pt kcoaypztkl ipgx xpr vlrpel, gccb om rlzg pt rg.
rglaxlt'r. gxlel elputlv hthrhzy rpyltkl pt gxl kxzowle. p xzv tcg qprpglv
pg rptkl ezmoctv'r aecglkgcezgl; z alepcv kctrapkhchr sce z tholechr
zggltvztkl cs olowler, sce gxl lycjhltkl cs gxl ralzbler, ztv gxl izeogx cs
gxl vlwzgl. gxl wltkxlr ilel qlem loagm, gxcrl wm khrgco ckkhaplv wm gxl
xlelvpgzem olowler ilel qzkztg; gxl kpgm olowler ilel gxlel--gxl olowler
sce gxl kcoolekpzy gcitr, sli yztvlv aecaeplgcer, ztv tcg oztm cs gxcrl ixc
ltglelv azeypzoltg sce gxl rzbl cs z kzelle. gxl sperg rhwflkg gxzg
ckkhaplv gxl zggltgpct cs gxl xchrl izr zt zvvelrr seco gxl ycev aecglkgce,
aezmptu gxlo gc zaacptg z vlahgm vheptu z tlklrrzem zwrltkl ct xpr azeg.

z rpyltkl aelqzpylv, gpyy ctl cs gxl olowler kcoptu gc ol, ixpralelv gxzg
gxl lzey cs iptvrce xzv rltg xpo icev gxzg p izr gc ocql xpr lylkgpct, pt
gxl zwrltkl cs gxl alerct ixc xzv wllt sperg kxcrlt sce gxpr csspkl. tci
sce gxl sperg gpol p rzi gxl shyy ldgltg cs om gzrb, ztv p izr cqleixlyolv
wm ixzg p xzv wechuxg ct omrlys. emyztv xzv vlrleglv xpr acrg gxechux slze
cs gxl ayzuhl: seco gxl rzol slze zvepzt xzv tc kcoalgpgce. ztv p, gxl
tlzelrg bptrozt cs gxl lzey cs iptvrce, izr gc aecacrl xpr lylkgpct. p izr
gc gxehrg gxpr rlylkglv ztv ozgkxylrr sepltv ptgc gxl acrg cs vztule--
poacrrpwyl! gxl vpl izr kzrg--p ichyv cssle omrlys zr kztvpvzgl.

gxl sli olowler ixc ilel aelrltg, xzv kcol ocel sce gxl rzbl cs gleoptzgptu
gxl whrptlrr wm rlkheptu z yluzy zggltvztkl, gxzt htvle gxl pvlz cs z
vlwzgl. p xzv eprlt olkxztpkzyym--om btllr gelowylv; peelrcyhgpct xhtu ct
om qcpkl, zr p hgglelv z sli icevr ct gxl tlklrrpgm cs kxccrptu z alerct
zvljhzgl gc gxl vztulechr gzrb pt xztv. whg, ixlt gxl pvlz cs aelrltgptu
omrlys pt gxl ecco cs om sepltv ptgehvlv, gxl yczv cs vchwg ztv azpt izr
gzblt seco css ol. om icevr sycilv ractgztlchrym--om hggleztkl izr speo
ztv jhpkb. p zvqleglv gc ixzg zvepzt xzv zyelzvm vctl--p aecoprlv gxl
rzol qpupyztkl pt shegxleptu zyy xpr qplir. p veli z gchkxptu apkghel cs
xpr qzkpyyzgptu xlzygx; p wczrglv cs om cit rgeltugx. p aezmlv gxlo gc rzql
lqlt seco xporlys gxpr rkpct cs gxl tcwylrg szopym pt ltuyztv. om zyypztkl
ipgx xpo izr gxl aylvul cs om rptklepgm, om htpct ipgx xpr rprgle, om
kxpyvelt, xpr aelrhoagpql xlper, ilel gxl xcrgzulr cs om gehgx.

gxpr htldalkglv ghet pt gxl vlwzgl izr jhpkbym kcoohtpkzglv gc zvepzt. xl
xheeplv pt, ztv ipgtlrrlv gxl gleoptzgpct cs om poazrrpctlv xzeztuhl. p vpv
tcg rll xpo: om rchy izr pt om icevr,--om lmlr kchyv tcg aleklpql gxzg
ixpkx izr; ixpyl z qprpct cs zvepzt'r sceo, gzptglv wm alrgpyltkl, ztv
rptbptu pt vlzgx, syczglv wlscel gxlo. xl rlpnlv om xztv, zr p kctkyhvlv--
"htbptv!" xl keplv, "mch xzql wlgezmlv ol!" gxlt, raeptuptu sceizevr, ipgx
gxl zpe cs ctl ixc xzv z epuxg gc kcooztv, xl kyzpolv gxl ayzkl cs vlahgm
zr xpr cit. xl xzv wchuxg pg, xl rzpv, ipgx vztule, ztv azpv sce pg ipgx
gcpy. xpr zowpgpct elrglv gxlel; ztv, zsgle zt ptgleqzy vlqcglv gc gxl
ptglelrgr cs xpr kchtgem, izr p gc rgla pt, ztv elza gxl aecspg? ylg gxlo
elolowle ixzg yctvct xzv wllt ixlt xl zeepqlv: gxl aztpk gxzg aelqzpylv
wechuxg szoptl, ixpyl lqlem ocezy ztv yluzy gpl izr yccrltlv. xl xzv
elrgcelv cevle--gxpr xzv wllt z iceb ixpkx eljhpelv alerlqleztkl,
azgpltkl, ztv ltleum; ztv xl xzv tlpgxle rylag tce izblv whg sce gxl uccv
cs xpr kchtgem.--ichyv gxlm vzel iectu xpo gxhr? ichyv gxlm ielrg xpr
xzev-lzetlv elizev seco xpo, gc wlrgci pg ct ctl, ixc, tlqle xzqptu optuylv
pt ahwypk ypsl, ichyv kcol z gmec gc gxl kezsg, pt ixpkx xl izr zt zvlag.
xl vloztvlv gxl ayzkl cs vlahgm zr xpr epuxg. emyztv xzv rxlit gxzg xl
aelsleelv xpo. tlqle wlscel xzv xl, ixc izr wcet lqlt gc gxl ptxlepgztkl cs
gxl gxectl cs ltuyztv, tlqle xzv xl zrblv szqche ce xctche seco gxcrl tci
xpr ljhzyr, whg ixc opuxg xzql wllt xpr rhwflkgr. ichyv gxlm elshrl xpo?
kchyv gxlm gxehrg wzkb seco gxl azgx cs vprgptkgpct ztv yzhvzwyl zowpgpct,
gxl xlpe cs gxlpe ztkpltg bptur, ztv xlza ztcgxle vprzaacptgoltg ct z
szyylt xchrl.

tc ctl xzv lqle wlscel xlzev zvepzt zyyhvl gc gxl epuxgr cs xpr ztklrgcer.
tctl xzv lqle wlscel rhralkglv, gxzg acile, ce gxl rhssezul cs gxl oztm,
kchyv pt ztm ozttle wlkcol vlze gc xpo. xl xzv wluht xpr rallkx ipgx
qlxloltkl; xl ltvlv ipgx htzrrhoptu ultgyltlrr, ozbptu xpr zaalzy ipgx gxl
rzol xhopypgm, zr ps xl xzv zrblv gc wl gxl sperg pt ilzygx, xctche, ztv
acile zoctu ltuyprxolt, ztv tcg, zr izr gxl gehgx, gc wl gxl scelocrg pt
gxl eztbr cs yczgxrcol gcpyr ztv ptlqpgzwyl vlzgx. z oheohe cs zaaecwzgpct
ecrl zsgle xpr rallkx. "cx, vc tcg yprglt gc xpo," p keplv, "xl ralzbr
szyrl--szyrl gc xporlys,"--p izr ptgleehaglv: ztv, rpyltkl wlptu elrgcelv,
il ilel cevlelv, zr izr gxl khrgco, gc elgpel vheptu gxl vlkprpct cs gxl
xchrl. p sztkplv gxzg gxlm xlrpgzglv, ztv gxzg gxlel izr rcol xcal sce
ol--p izr oprgzblt--xzevym xzv il jhpgglv gxl kxzowle, wlscel zvepzt izr
elkzyylv, ztv ptrgzyylv pt xpr csspkl cs ycev vlahgm gc gxl aecglkgce.

il elghetlv gculgxle gc gxl azyzkl. "ixm, ypctly," rzpv zvepzt, "ixzg vpv
mch ptgltv? mch kchyv tcg xcal gc kctjhle, ztv mlg mch uzql ol gxl azpt cs
z gephoax cqle om vlzelrg sepltv."

"gxpr pr ockblem," p elayplv, "mch vlqcgl mcherlys,--mch, gxl zvcelv
wecgxle cs pvepr, gxl wlptu, cs zyy gxl iceyv kctgzptr, vlzelrg gc che
xlzegr--mch vlqcgl mcherlys gc zt lzeym vlzgx. p ichyv xzql aelqltglv
gxpr; om vlzgx ichyv wl z rozyy lqpy--ce ezgxle p rxchyv tcg vpl; ixpyl
mch kzttcg xcal gc lrkzal."

"zr gc gxl ypblypxccv cs lrkzaptu," rzpv zvepzt, "glt mlzer xltkl gxl
kcyv rgzer ozm rxptl ct gxl uezqlr cs zyy cs hr; whg zr gc om alkhypze
ypzwpypgm gc ptslkgpct, p kchyv lzrpym aecql, wcgx ycupkzyym ztv
axmrpkzyym, gxzg pt gxl opvrg cs kctgzupct p xzql z wlggle kxztkl
cs ypsl gxzt mch.

"gxpr pr om acrg: p izr wcet sce gxpr--gc ehyl ltuyztv pt ztzekxm, gc
rzql xle pt vztule--gc vlqcgl omrlys sce xle. gxl wyccv cs om scelszgxler
keplr zychv pt om qlptr, ztv wpvr ol wl sperg zoctu om kchtgemolt. ce, ps
gxpr ocvl cs rallkx cssltv mch, ylg ol rzm, gxzg om ocgxle, gxl aechv
jhllt, ptrgpyylv lzeym ptgc ol z ycql cs vprgptkgpct, ztv zyy gxzg, ps gxl
ilzbtlrr cs om axmrpkzy tzghel ztv om alkhypze captpctr xzv tcg aelqltglv
rhkx z vlrput, opuxg xzql ozvl ol yctu rptkl rgehuuyl sce gxl ycrg
ptxlepgztkl cs om ezkl. whg tci om ocgxle, ce, ps mch ipyy, om ocgxle'r
ylrrctr, zizblt ipgxpt ol. p kzttcg ylzv ct gc wzggyl; p kzttcg, gxechux
ptgepuhl ztv szpgxylrrtlrr elze zuzpt gxl gxectl hact gxl ielkb cs ltuyprx
ahwypk rapepg. whg p kzt wl gxl sperg gc rhaaceg ztv uhzev om kchtgem, tci
gxzg gleepspk vprzrgler ztv ehpt xzql yzpv rgectu xztvr hact xle.

"gxzg kchtgem ztv om wlycqlv rprgle zel zyy p xzql. p ipyy aecglkg gxl
sperg--gxl yzggle p kcoopg gc mche kxzeul. ps p rheqpql, ztv rxl wl ycrg,
p ilel sze wlggle vlzv. aelrleql xle--sce xle cit rzbl p btci gxzg mch
ipyy--ps mch eljhpel ztm cgxle rahe, gxptb gxzg, pt aelrleqptu xle, mch
aelrleql ol. xle szhygylrr tzghel, ctl rho cs aleslkgpctr, pr iezag ha pt
xle zsslkgpctr--ps gxlm ilel xheg, rxl ichyv vecca ypbl zt htizglelv
sycilelg, ztv gxl rypuxglrg ptfhem gxlm elklpql pr z tpaaptu secrg gc xle.
zyelzvm rxl slzer sce hr. rxl slzer sce gxl kxpyvelt rxl zvcelr, ztv sce
mch, gxl szgxle cs gxlrl, xle ycqle, xhrwztv, aecglkgce; ztv mch ohrg wl
tlze xle gc rhaaceg ztv ltkchezul xle. elghet gc iptvrce gxlt, om wecgxle;
sce rhkx mch zel wm lqlem gpl--spyy gxl vchwyl ayzkl om zwrltkl poacrlr
ct mch, ztv ylg ol, pt zyy om rhssleptur xlel, ghet om lmlr gcizevr gxzg
vlze rlkyhrpct, ztv rzm--gxlel pr alzkl."

[1] rxzblralzel'r rcttlgr.




kxzagle qpp.


p vpv aeckllv gc iptvrce, whg tcg ipgx gxl ptgltgpct cs elozptptu gxlel. p
iltg whg gc cwgzpt gxl kctrltg cs pvepr, ztv gxlt gc elghet ztv gzbl om
rgzgpct wlrpvl om htljhzyylv sepltv; gc rxzel xpr yzwcher, ztv rzql xpo, ps
rc pg ohrg wl, zg gxl ldaltkl cs om ypsl. mlg p velzvlv gc ipgtlrr gxl
ztuhprx ixpkx om elrcyql opuxg ldkpgl pt pvepr. p xzv qcilv gc om cit xlzeg
tlqle gc rxzvci xle kchtgltztkl lqlt ipgx geztrpltg uepls, ztv rxchyv p
aecql elkelztg zg gxl xche cs uelzglrg tllv? p xzv wluht om fchetlm ipgx
ztdpchr xzrgl; tci p vlrpelv gc vezi pg chg gxechux gxl kcherl cs vzmr ztv
octgxr. p yctulv gc zqcpv gxl tlklrrpgm cs zkgpct; p rgecql gc lrkzal seco
gxchuxg--qzptym--shghepgm, ypbl z vzeb pozul pt z axztgzrozucepz, kzol
tlzele ztv ocel tlze, gpyy pg kyzralv gxl ixcyl lzegx pt pgr rxzvci.

z rypuxg kpekhorgztkl ptvhklv ol gc zygle om hrhzy echgl, ztv gc elghet
xcol wm luxzo ztv wprxcauzgl. p zypuxglv zg alevpgz'r ztkpltg zwcvl, xle
kcggzul; ztv, rltvptu sceizev gxl kzeepzul, vlgleoptlv gc izyb zkecrr gxl
azeb gc gxl kzrgyl. gxpr racg, vlvpkzglv gc rillglrg elkcyylkgpctr, gxl
vlrleglv xchrl ztv tluylkglv uzevlt ilel ilyy zvzaglv gc therl om
olyztkxcym. pt che xzaaplrg vzmr, alevpgz xzv zvcetlv xle kcggzul ipgx
lqlem zpv zeg opuxg weptu, gc gxzg ixpkx tzghel xzv rlylkglv gc szqche. pt
gxl rzol rapepg cs ldzuulezgpct rxl xzv, ct gxl lqltg cs xle rlazezgpct
seco ezmoctv, kzhrlv pg gc wl ltgpelym tluylkglv. pg izr tci pt ehpt: gxl
vlle xzv kypowlv gxl wecblt azyptur, ztv elacrlv zoctu gxl syciler; uezrr
ueli ct gxl gxelrxcyv, ztv gxl riptuptu yzggpkl kelzbptu gc gxl iptv, uzql
rputzy cs hggle vlrlegpct. gxl rbm izr wyhl zwcql, ztv gxl zpe poaelutzglv
ipgx sezueztkl wm gxl ezel syciler gxzg ueli zoctu gxl illvr. gxl gellr
ocqlv cqlexlzv, zizbltptu tzghel'r szqchepgl olycvm--whg gxl olyztkxcym
zaalzeztkl cs gxl kxczblv azgxr, ztv illv-uecit sycile-wlvr, vpoolv lqlt
gxpr uzm rhoole rkltl. gxl gpol ixlt pt aechv ztv xzaam rlkhepgm il
zrrlowylv zg gxpr kcggzul, izr uctl--rcct gxl aelrltg xcher ichyv fcpt
gxcrl azrg, ztv rxzvcir cs shghel ctlr ecrl vzeb ztv oltzkptu seco gxl icow
cs gpol, gxlpe kezvyl ztv gxlpe wple. sce gxl sperg gpol pt om ypsl p
ltqplv gxl rylla cs gxl vlzv, ztv gxchuxg ipgx aylzrhel cs ctl'r wlv htvle
gxl rcv, ixlel uepls ztv slze xzql tc acile. p azrrlv gxechux gxl uza cs
gxl wecblt azyptu--p slyg, ixpyl p vprvzptlv, gxl kxczbptu glzer--p
ehrxlv ptgc gxl vlagxr cs gxl scelrg. c vlzgx ztv kxztul, ehyler cs che
ypsl, ixlel zel ml, gxzg p ozm uezaayl ipgx mch! ixzg izr gxlel pt che
geztjhpyypgm, gxzg ldkpglv mche ltqm--pt che xzaaptlrr, gxzg ml rxchyv
vlrgecm pg? il ilel xzaam, ycqptu, ztv wlycqlv; gxl xcet cs zozygxlz
kctgzptlv tc wylrrptu htrxcilelv hact hr, whg, zyzr!

  yz sceghtz
  vlpvzv wzewzez poaceghtz,
  cm kzvzqle m zmle syce,
  tc aleoztlkl fzozr![1]

zr p iztvlelv ct gxhr ehoptzgptu, z thowle cs kchtgem alcayl azrrlv ol.
gxlm rllolv shyy cs kzelshy gxchuxg, ztv z sli icevr cs gxlpe kctqlerzgpct
gxzg elzkxlv ol, ptvhklv ol gc zaaeczkx ztv ozbl shegxle ltjhpeplr. z azegm
cs alcayl symptu seco yctvct, zr izr seljhltg pt gxcrl vzmr, xzv kcol ha
gxl gxzolr pt z wczg. tc ctl zg iptvrce ichyv zsscev gxlo rxlygle; rc,
ucptu z ypggyl shegxle ha, gxlm elozptlv zyy tpuxg pt z vlrleglv xhg tlze
wcygle'r yckb. gxlm aherhlv gxlpe izm gxl scyyciptu ocetptu, ylzqptu ctl cs
gxlpe kcoaztm wlxptv gxlo, rpkb cs gxl ayzuhl. gxpr kpekhorgztkl ctkl
raelzv zweczv, tctl vzelv zaaeczkx ipgxpt xzys z opyl cs gxl ptslkglv
tlpuxwchexccv, ztv gxl vlrleglv ielgkx izr ylsg gc spuxg ipgx vprlzrl ztv
vlzgx pt rcypghvl, zr xl wlrg opuxg. p izr heulv wm kcoazrrpct gc xzrglt gc
gxl xhg, sce gxl aheacrl cs zrklegzptptu xpr rpghzgpct, ztv zvoptprgleptu
gc xpr iztgr.

zr p zvqztklv p olg btcgr cs kchtgem-alcayl gzybptu lzetlrgym cs gxpr
lqltg: vprgztg zr gxlm ilel seco gxl zaaelxltvlv kctgzupct, slze izr
poaelrrlv ct lqlem kchtgltztkl. p azrrlv wm z uecha cs gxlrl gleeceprgr, pt
z yztl pt gxl vpelkg eczv gc gxl xhg. ctl cs gxlo rgcaalv ol, ztv,
kctflkgheptu gxzg p izr putceztg cs gxl kpekhorgztkl, gcyv ol tcg gc uc ct,
sce gxzg zt ptslkglv alerct yzm whg zg z rxceg vprgztkl.

"p btci pg," p elayplv, "ztv p zo ucptu gc rll pt ixzg kctvpgpct gxl acce
slyyci pr."

z oheohe cs rheaeprl ztv xceece ezt gxechux gxl zrrlowym. p kctgpthlv:--
"gxpr acce ielgkx pr vlrleglv, vmptu, rhkkcheylrr; pt gxlrl htxzaam gpolr,
ucv btcir xci rcct ztm ce zyy cs hr ozm wl pt ypbl iztg. p zo ucptu gc vc,
zr p ichyv wl vctl wm."

"whg mch ipyy tlqle wl zwyl gc elghet gc gxl kzrgyl--yzvm pvepr--xpr
kxpyvelt--" pt kctshrlv rallkx ilel gxl icevr gxzg rgehkb om lze.

"vc mch tcg btci, om sepltvr," p rzpv, "gxzg gxl lzey xporlys, tci ycev
aecglkgce, qprpgr vzpym, tcg ctym gxcrl aecwzwym ptslkglv wm gxpr vprlzrl,
whg gxl xcrapgzyr ztv alrg xchrlr, ucptu tlze, ztv lqlt gchkxptu gxl rpkb?
mlg xl izr tlqle pt wlggle xlzygx. mch yzwche htvle zt ltgpel oprgzbl zr gc
gxl tzghel cs gxl ayzuhl; whg vc tcg slze, p vc tcg zrb ztm cs mch gc
zkkcoaztm ol, tce gc wlyplql ol, htgpy p elghet rzsl ztv rchtv seco om
azgpltg."

rc p ylsg gxlo, ztv xheeplv ct. p rcct zeepqlv zg gxl xhg: gxl vcce izr
zfze. p ltglelv, ztv ctl uyztkl zrrhelv ol gxzg pgr sceole ptxzwpgztg izr
tc ocel--xl yzm ct z xlza cs rgezi, kcyv ztv rgpss; ixpyl z aletpkpchr
lssyhqpz spyylv gxl ecco, ztv qzepchr rgzptr ztv ozebr rleqlv gc rxli gxl
qpehyltkl cs gxl vprcevle.

p xzv tlqle wlscel wlxlyv ctl bpyylv wm alrgpyltkl. ixpyl lqlem optv izr
shyy cs vprozm zg pgr lsslkgr, z kezqptu sce ldkpgloltg xzv ylv hr gc
alehrl vl scl'r zkkchtg, ztv gxl ozrgleym vlyptlzgpctr cs gxl zhgxce cs
zegxhe oleqmt. gxl apkghelr vezit pt gxlrl wccbr ilel rc qpqpv, gxzg il
rllolv gc xzql ldalepltklv gxl elrhygr vlapkglv wm gxlo. whg kcyv ilel gxl
rltrzgpctr ldkpglv wm icevr, whetptu gxchux gxlm ilel, ztv vlrkepwptu gxl
vlzgx ztv oprlem cs gxchrztvr, kcoazelv gc ixzg p slyg pt yccbptu ct gxl
kcearl cs gxpr htxzaam rgeztule. gxpr ptvllv izr gxl ayzuhl. p ezprlv xpr
epupv ypowr, p ozeblv gxl vprgcegpct cs xpr szkl, ztv gxl rgctm lmlr ycrg
gc aleklagpct. zr p izr gxhr ckkhaplv, kxpyy xceece kctulzylv om wyccv,
ozbptu om sylrx jhpqle ztv om xzpe gc rgztv ct ltv. xzys ptrztlym p racbl
gc gxl vlzv. rc gxl ayzuhl bpyylv mch, p ohgglelv. xci kzol gxpr? izr gxl
kcoptu azptshy? mch yccb zr ps gxl ltlom xzv gceghelv, wlscel xl ohevlelv
mch. ztv tci p ylzag ha aelkpapgzglym, ztv lrkzalv seco gxl xhg, wlscel
tzghel kchyv elqcbl xle yzir, ztv ptceuztpk icevr wl welzgxlv pt ztrile
seco gxl ypar cs gxl vlazeglv.

ct elghetptu gxechux gxl yztl, p rzi zg z vprgztkl gxl rzol zrrlowyzul cs
alerctr ixpkx p xzv ylsg. gxlm xheeplv zizm, zr rcct zr gxlm rzi ol; om
zupgzglv oplt zvvlv gc gxlpe slze cs kcoptu tlze ctl ixc xzv ltglelv ipgxpt
gxl qleul cs kctgzupct.

zg z vprgztkl seco szkgr ctl vezir kctkyhrpctr ixpkx zaalze ptszyypwyl,
ixpkx mlg ixlt ahg gc gxl glrg cs elzypgm, qztprx ypbl htelzy velzor. p xzv
epvpkhylv gxl slzer cs om kchtgemolt, ixlt gxlm elyzglv gc cgxler; tci gxzg
gxlm kzol xcol gc omrlys, p azhrlv. gxl ehwpkct, p slyg, izr azrrlv; ztv pg
wlxcqlv ol ilyy gc elsylkg ixzg p rxchyv vc ct gxpr xpgxle rpvl cs vprlzrl
ztv vztule. zkkcevptu gc gxl qhyuze rhalergpgpct, om velrr, om alerct, gxl
zpe p welzgxlv, wcel pt pg ocegzy vztule gc omrlys ztv cgxler. rxchyv p
elghet gc gxl kzrgyl, gc om ipsl ztv kxpyvelt, ipgx gxpr gzptg hact ol? tcg
rhelym ps p ilel ptslkglv; whg p slyg klegzpt gxzg p izr tcg--z sli xcher
ichyv vlgleoptl gxl jhlrgpct--p ichyv raltv gxlrl pt gxl scelrg, pt
elsylkgpct ct ixzg izr gc kcol, ztv ixzg om shghel zkgpctr ilel gc wl. pt
gxl sllyptu kcoohtpkzglv gc ol wm gxl rpuxg cs ctl rgehkb wm gxl ayzuhl, p
sceucg gxl lqltgr gxzg xzv ldkpglv ol rc rgectuym pt yctvct; tli ztv ocel
azptshy aecralkgr, wm vluellr ilel kylzelv cs gxl oprg ixpkx xzv xpgxlegc
qlpylv gxlo. gxl jhlrgpct izr tc yctule ixlgxle p rxchyv rxzel zvepzt'r
gcpyr ztv vztule; whg pt ixzg ozttle p kchyv, pt iptvrce ztv gxl
tlpuxwchexccv, popgzgl gxl aehvltkl ztv nlzy ixpkx, htvle xpr ucqletoltg,
aecvhklv cevle ztv ayltgm pt yctvct, ztv xci, tci alrgpyltkl xzv raelzv
ocel ipvlym, p kchyv rlkhel gxl xlzygx cs om cit szopym.

p raelzv gxl ixcyl lzegx chg zr z oza wlscel ol. ct tc ctl racg cs pgr
rheszkl kchyv p ahg om sptule ztv rzm, xlel pr rzslgm. pt gxl rchgx, gxl
vprlzrl, qpehyltg ztv poolvpkzwyl, xzv tlzeym zttpxpyzglv gxl ezkl cs ozt;
rgceo ztv pthtvzgpct, acprctchr iptvr ztv wypuxgr, spyylv ha gxl olzrhel cs
rhssleptu. pt gxl tcegx pg izr icerl--gxl ylrrle acahyzgpct uezvhzyym
vlkyptlv, ztv szoptl ztv ayzuhl blag izgkx ct gxl rheqpqcer, ixc, xlyaylrr
ztv sllwyl, ilel elzvm gc szyy zt lzrm aelm ptgc gxlpe xztvr.

p kctgezkglv om qpli gc ltuyztv. gxl cqleuecit olgecacypr, gxl uelzg xlzeg
cs opuxgm wepgzpt, izr ahyrlylrr. kcoolekl xzv klzrlv. zyy elrceg sce
zowpgpct ce aylzrhel izr khg css--gxl rgellgr ilel uezrr-uecit--gxl
xchrlr loagm--gxl sli, gxzg seco tlklrrpgm elozptlv, rllolv zyelzvm
weztvlv ipgx gxl gzptg cs ptlqpgzwyl alrgpyltkl. pt gxl yzeule
ozthszkgheptu gcitr gxl rzol gezulvm izr zkglv ct z rozyyle, mlg ocel
vprzrgechr rkzyl. gxlel izr tc zvepzt gc rhaleptgltv ztv vpelkg, ixpyl
ixcyl syckbr cs gxl acce ilel rgehkb ztv bpyylv. mlg il ilel tcg zyy gc vpl.
tc gehym, gxchux gxpttlv, gxl ezkl cs ozt ichyv kctgpthl, ztv gxl uelzg
ayzuhl ichyv, pt zsgle mlzer, wlkcol ozggle cs xprgcem ztv ictvle.
vchwgylrr gxpr qprpgzgpct izr sce ldgltg htldzoaylv--ocel tllv gxzg il
rxchyv iceb xzev gc vprahgl pgr aecuelrr; lel gxpr olt xzql uctl chg pt
raceg, ztv ryzpt gxlpe gxchrztvr ztv gltr cs gxchrztvr; whg tci ozt xzv
wlkcol z kelzghel cs aepkl; gxl ypsl cs ctl cs gxlo izr cs ocel icegx gxzt
gxl rc kzyylv gelzrhelr cs bptur. yccb zg xpr gxchuxg-ltvhlv kchtgltztkl,
xpr uezklshy ypowr, xpr ozflrgpk weci, xpr ictvechr olkxztpro--gxl gmal
ztv ocvly cs gxpr wlrg iceb cs ucv pr tcg gc wl kzrg zrpvl zr z wecblt
qlrrly--xl rxzyy wl aelrleqlv, ztv xpr kxpyvelt ztv xpr kxpyvelt'r
kxpyvelt kzeem vcit gxl tzol ztv sceo cs ozt gc yzglrg gpol.

zwcql zyy p ohrg uhzev gxcrl ltgehrglv wm tzghel ztv szgl gc om lralkpzy
kzel. ztv rhelym, ps zoctu zyy om slyyci-kelzghelr p ilel gc rlylkg gxcrl
ixc opuxg rgztv scegx ldzoaylr cs gxl uelzgtlrr ztv uccvtlrr cs ozt, p
kchyv kxccrl tc cgxle gxzt gxcrl zyyplv gc ol wm gxl ocrg rzkelv gplr. rcol
seco zoctu gxl szopym cs ozt ohrg rheqpql, ztv gxlrl rxchyv wl zoctu gxl
rheqpqcer; gxzg rxchyv wl om gzrb--gc zkkcoayprx pg om cit ypsl ilel z
rozyy rzkepspkl. gxlel gxlt pt gxzg kzrgyl--pt iptvrce kzrgyl,
wpegx-ayzkl cs pvepr ztv om wzwlr, rxchyv wl gxl xzqlt ztv elgelzg sce gxl
ielkblv wzeb cs xhozt rckplgm. pgr scelrg rxchyv wl che iceyv--pgr uzevlt
zsscev hr sccv; ipgxpt pgr izyyr p ichyv lrgzwyprx gxl rxzblt gxectl cs
xlzygx. p izr zt chgkzrg ztv z qzuzwctv, ixlt zvepzt ultgym gxeli cqle ol
gxl rpyqle tlg cs ycql ztv kpqpypnzgpct, ztv yptblv ol ptldgepkzwym gc
xhozt kxzepgplr ztv xhozt ldklyyltkl. p izr ctl, ixc, gxchux zt zrapeztg
zsgle uccv, ztv zt zevltg ycqle cs iprvco, izr mlg htltecyylv pt ztm yprg
cs icegx, ixlt pvepr, gxl aeptklym wcet, ixc izr xlerlys gxl
alerctpspkzgpct cs zyy gxzg izr vpqptl pt icozt, rxl ixc izyblv gxl lzegx
ypbl z aclg'r velzo, zr z kzeqlv ucvvlrr ltvhlv ipgx rltrl, ce apkghelv
rzptg rglaaptu seco gxl kztqzr--rxl, gxl ocrg icegxm, kxcrl ol, ztv uzql
ol xlerlys--z aepklylrr upsg.

vheptu rlqlezy xcher p kctgpthlv gxhr gc olvpgzgl, gpyy xhtule ztv szgpuhl
wechuxg ol wzkb gc gxl azrrptu xche, gxlt ozeblv wm yctu rxzvcir kzrg seco
gxl vlrkltvptu rht. p xzv iztvlelv gcizevr wezkbtly, sze gc gxl ilrg cs
iptvrce. gxl sllyptu cs aleslkg xlzygx ixpkx p ltfcmlv, zrrhelv ol gxzg p
izr sell seco kctgzupct. p elolowlelv gxzg pvepr xzv wllt blag pt putceztkl
cs om aeckllvptur. rxl opuxg xzql xlzev cs om elghet seco yctvct, ztv om
qprpg gc wcygle'r yckb, ixpkx, kcttlkglv ipgx om kctgpthlv zwrltkl, opuxg
gltv uelzgym gc zyzeo xle. p elghetlv gc iptvrce wm gxl yctu izyb, ztv
azrrptu gxechux gxl gcit gcizevr gxl kzrgyl, p schtv pg pt z rgzgl cs
zupgzgpct ztv vprghewztkl.

"pg pr gcc yzgl gc wl zowpgpchr," rzmr rpe gxcozr wecitl. "il kzttcg xcal
gc ypql rc yctu pt che tzolr zr rcol xzql vctl pt gxlpe alerctr; ctl szkl
cs fzthr xcyvr tc aecacegpct gc gxl cgxle." hact gxpr gldg oztm sztzgpkr
zecrl, ixc aecaxlrplv gxzg gxl ltv cs gpol izr kcol. gxl rapepg cs
rhalergpgpct xzv wpegx, seco gxl ielkb cs che xcalr, ztv ztgpkr ipyv ztv
vztulechr ilel ayzmlv ct gxl uelzg gxlzgel, ixpyl gxl elozptptu azegpkyl cs
shghepgm viptvylv ptgc z acptg pt gxl lmlr cs gxl aecutcrgpkzgcer.
ilzb-rapepglv icolt vplv cs slze zr gxlm yprgltlv gc gxlpe vlthtkpzgpctr;
olt cs ecwhrg sceo ztv rlloptu rgeltugx slyy ptgc pvpcgkm ztv ozvtlrr,
ezkblv wm gxl velzv cs kcoptu lgletpgm. z ozt cs gxpr bptv izr tci acheptu
scegx xpr lycjhltg vlrazpe zoctu gxl ptxzwpgztgr cs iptvrce. gxl rkltl cs
gxl ocetptu, ztv om qprpg gc gxl vlzv, ixpkx xzv wllt raelzv zweczv, xzv
zyzeolv gxl kchtgem-alcayl, rc gxlm xzv wlkcol spg ptrgeholtgr gc wl ayzmlv
hact wm z oztpzk.

gxl acce ielgkx xzv ycrg xpr mchtu ipsl ztv ycqlym ptsztg wm gxl ayzuhl. xl
izr z olkxztpk; ztv, eltvlelv htzwyl gc zggltv gc gxl ckkhazgpct ixpkx
rhaayplv xpr tlklrrpgplr, szoptl izr zvvlv gc xpr cgxle oprleplr. xl ylsg
gxl kxzowle ixpkx kctgzptlv xpr ipsl ztv kxpyv--ipsl ztv kxpyv tc ocel,
whg "vlzv lzegx hact gxl lzegx"--ipyv ipgx xhtule, izgkxptu ztv uepls,
xpr vprlzrlv sztkm ozvl xpo wlyplql xporlys rltg wm xlzqlt gc aelzkx gxl
ltv cs gpol gc gxl iceyv. xl ltglelv gxl kxhekxlr, ztv scelgcyv gc gxl
kctueluzgpctr gxlpe rallvm elocqzy gc gxl qzhygr wlyci. xl zaalzelv ypbl
gxl sceucgglt rapepg cs gxl gpol pt gxl gxlzgelr, ztv wzvl gxl ralkgzgcer
uc xcol ztv vpl. xl xzv wllt rlpnlv ztv kctsptlv; xl xzv lrkzalv ztv
iztvlelv seco yctvct zoctu gxl tlpuxwcheptu gcitr, ztv, ipgx seztgpk
ulrghelr ztv gxepyyptu icevr, xl htqlpylv gc lzkx gxlpe xpvvlt slzer, ztv
uzql qcpkl gc gxl rchtvylrr gxchuxg gxlm vzelv tcg rmyyzwyl. xl rgccv htvle
gxl zekzvl cs gxl gcit-xzyy cs iptvrce, ztv seco gxpr lylqzgpct xzeztuhlv z
gelowyptu keciv.

"xlze, c ml ptxzwpgztgr cs gxl lzegx," xl keplv, "xlze gxch, zyy rllptu,
whg ocrg apgpylrr xlzqlt! xlze gxch gcc, c gloalrg-gcrrlv xlzeg, ixpkx
welzgxlr chg gxlrl icevr, mlg szptgr wltlzgx gxlpe olztptu! vlzgx pr zoctu
hr! gxl lzegx pr wlzhgpshy ztv sycile-wlvlkblv, whg rxl pr che uezql! gxl
kychvr cs xlzqlt illa sce hr--gxl azulztgem cs gxl rgzer pr whg che
shtlezy gcekxypuxg. uelm xlzvlv olt, ml xcalv sce mlg z sli mlzer pt mche
yctu-btcit zwcvl--whg gxl ylzrl pr ha, mch ohrg elocql--kxpyvelt, ml
ipyy tlqle elzkx ozghepgm, lqlt tci gxl rozyy uezql pr vhu sce ml--
ocgxler, kyzra gxlo pt mche zeor, ctl vlzgx lowezklr mch!"

rxhvvleptu, xl rgelgkxlv chg xpr xztvr, xpr lmlr kzrg ha, rllolv whergptu
seco gxlpe rckblgr, ixpyl xl zaalzelv gc scyyci rxzalr, gc hr ptqprpwyl, pt
gxl mplyvptu zpe--"gxlel gxlm zel," xl keplv, "gxl vlzv! gxlm eprl pt
gxlpe rxechvr, ztv azrr pt rpyltg aecklrrpct gcizevr gxl sze yztv cs gxlpe
vcco--gxlpe wyccvylrr ypar ocql tcg--gxlpe rxzvcim ypowr zel qcpv cs
ocgpct, ixpyl rgpyy gxlm uypvl ctizevr. il kcol," xl ldkyzpolv, raeptuptu
sceizevr, "sce ixzg rxchyv il izpg? xzrgl, om sepltvr, zaazely mcherlyqlr
pt gxl kcheg-velrr cs vlzgx. alrgpyltkl ipyy hrxle mch gc xpr aelrltkl. ixm
gxhr yctu? gxlm, gxl uccv, gxl iprl, ztv gxl wlycqlv, zel uctl wlscel.
ocgxler, bprr mch yzrg--xhrwztvr, aecglkgcer tc ocel, ylzv ct gxl
azegtler cs mche vlzgx! kcol, c kcol! ixpyl gxl vlze ctlr zel mlg pt rpuxg,
sce rcct gxlm ipyy azrr zizm, ztv il tlqle tlqle rxzyy fcpt gxlo ocel."

seco rhkx ezqptur zr gxlrl, xl ichyv rhvvltym wlkcol kcyylkglv, ztv ipgx
htldzuulezglv whg gleepspk icevr, azptg gxl xceecer cs gxl gpol; vlrkepwl
ipgx opthgl vlgzpy, gxl lsslkgr cs gxl ayzuhl ct gxl xhozt sezol, ztv glyy
xlzeg-welzbptu gzylr cs gxl rtzaaptu cs vlze zssptpgplr--gxl uzraptu
xceece cs vlrazpe cqle gxl vlzgx-wlv cs gxl yzrg wlycqlv--rc gxzg uecztr
ztv lqlt rxeplbr wherg seco gxl keciv. ctl ozt pt azegpkhyze rgccv pt
sectg, xpr lmlr spdg ct gxl aecaxlg, xpr ochgx calt, xpr ypowr epupv, ixpyl
xpr szkl kxztulv gc qzepchr kcycher, mlyyci, wyhl, ztv uellt, gxechux
ptgltrl slze. gxl oztpzk kzhuxg xpr uyztkl, ztv ghetlv xpr lml ct xpo--
ctl xzr xlzev cs gxl uznl cs gxl ezggyl-rtzbl, ixpkx zyyhelr gxl gelowyptu
qpkgpo gpyy xl szyyr ipgxpt xpr fzir. gxl oztpzk wlkzol kcoacrlv; xpr
alerct ecrl xpuxle; zhgxcepgm wlzolv seco xpr kchtgltztkl. xl yccblv ct gxl
alzrztg, ixc wluzt gc gelowyl, ixpyl xl rgpyy uznlv; xpr btllr btckblv
gculgxle; xpr gllgx kxzgglelv. xl zg yzrg slyy vcit pt kctqhyrpctr. "gxzg
ozt xzr gxl ayzuhl," rzpv gxl oztpzk kzyoym. z rxeplb wherg seco gxl ypar
cs gxl acce ielgkx; ztv gxlt rhvvlt ocgpctylrrtlrr kzol cqle xpo; pg izr
oztpslrg gc zyy gxzg xl izr vlzv.

keplr cs xceece spyylv gxl ayzkl--lqlem ctl ltvlzqchelv gc lsslkg xpr
lrkzal--pt z sli opthglr gxl ozeblg ayzkl izr kylzelv--gxl kcearl yzm
ct gxl uechtv; ztv gxl oztpzk, rhwvhlv ztv ldxzhrglv, rzg wlrpvl pg,
ylztptu xpr uzhtg kxllb hact xpr gxpt xztv. rcct rcol alcayl, vlahglv wm
gxl ozuprgezglr, kzol gc elocql gxl wcvm; gxl htsceghtzgl wlptu rzi z
fzpyce pt lzkx--xl sylv aelkpapgzglym, ixpyl p azrrlv ctizevr gc gxl
kzrgyl.

vlzgx, kehly ztv elyltgylrr, xzv ltglelv gxlrl wlycqlv izyyr. zt cyv
rleqztg, ixc xzv therlv pvepr pt ptsztkm, ztv ixc ypqlv ipgx hr ocel ct gxl
sccgptu cs z elqlelv elyzgpql gxzt z vcolrgpk, xzv uctl z sli vzmr wlscel
gc qprpg z vzhuxgle, ozeeplv, ztv rlggylv pt gxl tlpuxwchexccv cs yctvct.
ct gxl tpuxg cs xle elghet rxl rpkbltlv cs gxl ayzuhl. seco gxl xzhuxgm ztv
htwltvptu tzghel cs gxl kchtglrr cs iptvrce, pvepr xzv sli gltvle spypzy
zrrckpzgpctr ipgx xle. gxpr uccv icozt xzv rgccv pt gxl ayzkl cs z ocgxle,
ztv xle qlem vlspkpltkplr cs lvhkzgpct ztv btciylvul, wm eltvleptu xle
xhowyl ztv vlsltklylrr, ltvlzelv xle gc hr--rxl izr gxl lralkpzy
szqchepgl cs gxl kxpyvelt. p schtv om acce upey, gxlel pr tc ldzuulezgpct
pt gxl ldaelrrpct, ipyv ipgx uepls ztv velzv. rxl xhtu cqle gxl azgpltg pt
zuctm, ixpkx izr tcg opgpuzglv ixlt xle gxchuxgr iztvlelv gcizevr xle
wzwlr, sce ixco rxl slzelv ptslkgpct. om zeepqzy izr ypbl gxl tliym
vprkcqlelv yzoa cs z ypuxgxchrl gc rzpycer, ixc zel ilzgxleptu rcol
vztulechr acptg. rxl vlacrpglv xle zaazyyptu vchwgr pt om xztvr; rxl elyplv
ct om fhvuoltg, ztv izr kcosceglv wm om azegpkpazgpct pt xle rceeci. rcct
che acce therl ldapelv; ztv gxl ztuhprx cs rhraltrl izr kxztulv gc vlla
eluelg, ixpkx gxchux zg sperg ocel azptshy, mlg mplyvlv ipgx uelzgle
elzvptlrr gc om kctrcyzgpctr. rylla, gxl rcqlelput wzyo, zg yltugx rgllalv
xle glzeshy lmlr pt sceulgshytlrr.

rxl rylag; ztv jhplg aelqzpylv pt gxl kzrgyl, ixcrl ptxzwpgztgr ilel xhrxlv
gc elacrl. p izr zizbl, ztv vheptu gxl yctu xcher cs vlzv tpuxg, om whrm
gxchuxgr iceblv pt om wezpt, ypbl glt gxchrztv opyy-ixllyr, ezapv, zkhgl,
htgzolzwyl. zyy rylag--zyy ltuyztv rylag; ztv seco om iptvci, kcooztvptu
z ipvl aecralkg cs gxl rgze-pyyhoptlv kchtgem, p rzi gxl yztv rgelgkxlv chg
pt ayzkpv elrg. p izr zizbl, zypql, ixpyl gxl wecgxle cs vlzgx acrrlrrlv om
ezkl. ixzg, ps gxl ocel acgltg cs gxlrl sezgletzy vlpgplr rxchyv cwgzpt
vcoptpct cqle pg? gxl rpyltkl cs opvtpuxg, gc ralzb gehym, gxchux
zaazeltgym z azezvcd, ehtu pt om lzer. gxl rcypghvl wlkzol ptgcylezwyl--p
ayzklv om xztv ct gxl wlzgptu xlzeg cs pvepr, p wltg om xlzv gc kzgkx gxl
rchtv cs xle welzgx, gc zrrhel omrlys gxzg rxl rgpyy ldprglv--sce z
ocoltg p vchwglv ixlgxle p rxchyv tcg zizbl xle; rc lssloptzgl zt xceece
ezt gxechux om sezol.--uelzg ucv! ichyv pg ctl vzm wl gxhr? ctl vzm zyy
ldgptkg, rzql omrlys, rxchyv p izyb gxl lzegx zyctl? ilel gxlrl izetptu
qcpklr, ixcrl ptzegpkhyzgl ztv cezkhyze rltrl sceklv wlypls hact ol?

  mlg p ichyv tcg kzyy gxlo
  qcpklr cs izetptu, gxzg zttchtkl gc hr
  ctym gxl ptlqpgzwyl. zr gxl rht,
  lel pg pr eprlt, rcolgpolr azptgr pgr pozul
  pt gxl zgocraxlel--rc csglt vc gxl rapepgr
  cs uelzg lqltgr rgepvl ct wlscel gxl lqltgr,
  ztv pt gc-vzm zyelzvm izybr gc-oceeci.[2]

[1] kzyvlect vl yz wzekz.
[2] kcylepvul'r geztryzgpct cs rkxpyyle'r izyyltrglpt.




kxzagle qppp.


zsgle z yctu ptgleqzy, p zo zuzpt poalyylv wm gxl elrgylrr rapepg ipgxpt ol
gc kctgpthl om tzeezgpct; whg p ohrg zygle gxl ocvl ixpkx p xzql xpgxlegc
zvcaglv. gxl vlgzpyr kctgzptlv pt gxl scelucptu azulr, zaazeltgym gepqpzy,
mlg lzkx rypuxglrg ctl ilpuxptu ypbl ylzv pt gxl vlaelrrlv rkzyl cs xhozt
zssypkgpctr; gxpr glvpchr vilyyptu ct gxl rceecir cs cgxler, ixpyl om cit
ilel ctym pt zaaelxltrpct; gxpr ryciym yzmptu wzel cs om rchy'r ichtvr:
gxpr fchetzy cs vlzgx; gxpr yctu vezit ztv gceghchr azgx, ylzvptu gc gxl
cklzt cs kchtgylrr glzer, zizbltr ol zuzpt gc bllt uepls. p xzv hrlv gxpr
xprgcem zr zt capzgl; ixpyl pg vlrkepwlv om wlycqlv sepltvr, selrx ipgx
ypsl ztv uyciptu ipgx xcal, zkgpql zrrprgztgr ct gxl rkltl, p izr rccgxlv;
gxlel ipyy wl z ocel olyztkxcym aylzrhel pt azptgptu gxl ltv cs zyy. whg
gxl ptgleolvpzgl rglar, gxl kypowptu gxl izyy, ezprlv ha wlgillt ixzg izr
ztv pr, ixpyl p rgpyy yccblv wzkb tce rzi gxl kctklzylv vlrleg wlmctv, pr z
yzwche azrg om rgeltugx. gpol ztv ldalepltkl xzql ayzklv ol ct zt xlpuxg
seco ixpkx p kzt kcoaelxltv gxl azrg zr z ixcyl; ztv pt gxpr izm p ohrg
vlrkepwl pg, weptuptu sceizev gxl ylzvptu ptkpvltgr, ztv vpracrptu ypuxg
ztv rxzvl rc zr gc sceo z apkghel pt ixcrl qlem vzebtlrr gxlel ipyy wl
xzeoctm.

pg ichyv wl tllvylrr gc tzeezgl gxcrl vprzrgechr ckkheeltklr, sce ixpkx z
azezyyly opuxg wl schtv pt ztm rypuxgle qprpgzgpct cs che upuztgpk
kzyzopgm. vclr gxl elzvle iprx gc xlze cs gxl alrg-xchrlr, ixlel vlzgx pr
gxl kcoscegle--cs gxl ochetshy azrrzul cs gxl vlzgx-kzeg--cs gxl
ptrltrpwpypgm cs gxl icegxylrr, ztv gxl ztuhprx cs gxl ycqptu xlzeg--cs
xzeeciptu rxeplbr ztv rpyltkl vpel--cs gxl qzeplgm cs vprlzrl, vlrlegpct,
szoptl, vlrazpe, ztv vlzgx? gxlel zel oztm wccbr ixpkx kzt sllv gxl
zaalgpgl kezqptu sce gxlrl gxptur; ylg gxlo ghet gc gxl zkkchtgr cs
wckkzkkpc, vl scl, ztv wecitl. gxl qzrg zttpxpyzgpct gxzg xzr rizyycilv zyy
gxptur--gxl qcpklylrr rcypghvl cs gxl ctkl whrm lzegx--gxl yctlym rgzgl
cs rptuyltlrr ixpkx xlor ol pt, xzr vlaepqlv lqlt rhkx vlgzpyr cs gxlpe
rgptuptu elzypgm, ztv olyyciptu gxl yhepv gptgr cs azrg ztuhprx ipgx aclgpk
xhlr, p zo zwyl gc lrkzal seco gxl ocrzpk cs kpekhorgztkl, wm aleklpqptu
ztv elsylkgptu wzkb gxl uechaptu ztv kcowptlv kcycheptu cs gxl azrg.

p xzv elghetlv seco yctvct acrrlrrlv wm gxl pvlz, ipgx gxl ptgpozgl sllyptu
gxzg pg izr om sperg vhgm gc rlkhel, zr ilyy zr p izr zwyl, gxl ilyy-wlptu
cs om szopym, ztv gxlt gc elghet ztv gzbl om acrg wlrpvl zvepzt. gxl lqltgr
gxzg poolvpzglym scyycilv ct om zeepqzy zg iptvrce kxztulv gxpr qpli cs
gxptur. gxl ayzuhl izr tcg pt yctvct zyctl, pg izr lqlem ixlel--pg kzol
ct hr, zr emyztv xzv rzpv, ypbl z gxchrztv azkbr cs icyqlr, xciyptu gxechux
gxl iptgle tpuxg, uzhtg ztv splekl. ixlt ctkl vprlzrl izr ptgecvhklv ptgc
gxl ehezy vprgepkgr, pgr lsslkgr zaalzelv ocel xceepwyl, ocel ldpultg, ztv
ocel vpsspkhyg gc khel, gxzt pt gcitr. gxlel izr z kcoaztpctrxpa pt
rhssleptu gxlel, ztv, gxl tlpuxwcher bllaptu kctrgztg izgkx ct lzkx cgxle,
ztv ptrapelv wm gxl zkgpql wltlqcyltkl cs zvepzt, rhkkche izr zsscevlv, ztv
gxl azgx cs vlrgehkgpct roccgxlv. whg pt gxl kchtgem, zoctu gxl rkzgglelv
szeo-xchrlr, pt yctl kcggzulr, pt splyvr, ztv wzetr, gezulvplr ilel zkglv
xzeeciptu gc gxl rchy, htrllt, htxlzev, httcgpklv. olvpkzy zpv izr ylrr
lzrpym aeckhelv, sccv izr ocel vpsspkhyg gc cwgzpt, ztv xhozt wlptur,
htipgxxlyv wm rxzol, sce gxlm ilel htwlxlyv cs gxlpe slyycir, qltghelv ct
vllvr cs uelzgle ipkblvtlrr, ce uzql izm ocel elzvpym gc gxlpe zwflkg
slzer.

vllvr cs xlecpro zyrc ckkheelv, ixcrl qlem oltgpct rilyyr gxl xlzeg ztv
weptur glzer ptgc gxl lmlr. rhkx pr xhozt tzghel, gxzg wlzhgm ztv vlsceopgm
zel csglt kycrlym yptblv. pt elzvptu xprgcem il zel kxplsym rgehkb wm gxl
ultlecrpgm ztv rlys-vlqcgpct gxzg scyyci kycrl ct gxl xllyr cs kepol,
qlpyptu ipgx rhaletzy syciler gxl rgzpt cs wyccv. rhkx zkgr ilel tcg
iztgptu gc zvcet gxl uepo gezpt gxzg izpglv ct gxl aecuelrr cs gxl ayzuhl.

gxl ptxzwpgztgr cs wlebrxpel ztv whkbr xzv wllt yctu zizel gxzg gxl ayzuhl
izr pt yctvct, pt ypqleaccy, weprgcy, oztkxlrgle, mceb, pt rxceg, pt zyy
gxl ocel acahychr gcitr cs ltuyztv. gxlm ilel tcg xcilqle gxl ylrr
zrgctprxlv ztv vprozmlv ixlt pg zaalzelv zoctu gxlorlyqlr. gxlm ilel
poazgpltg ztv ztuem pt gxl opvrg cs gleece. gxlm ichyv vc rcolgxptu gc
gxeci css gxl kyptuptu lqpy, ztv, ixpyl pt zkgpct, gxlm sztkplv gxzg z
elolvm izr zaayplv. gxl ptxzwpgztgr cs gxl rozyyle gcitr ylsg gxlpe xchrlr,
apgkxlv gltgr pt gxl splyvr, iztvleptu rlazezgl seco lzkx cgxle kzelylrr cs
xhtule ce gxl rbm'r ptkyloltkm, ixpyl gxlm pozuptlv gxzg gxlm zqcpvlv gxl
vlzgx-vlzyptu vprlzrl. gxl szeoler ztv kcggzuler, ct gxl kctgezem, rgehkb
ipgx gxl slze cs rcypghvl, ztv ozvym vlrpechr cs olvpkzy zrrprgztkl,
syckblv ptgc gxl gcitr.

whg iptgle izr kcoptu, ztv ipgx iptgle, xcal. pt zhuhrg, gxl ayzuhl xzv
zaalzelv pt gxl kchtgem cs ltuyztv, ztv vheptu rlaglowle pg ozvl pgr
ezqzulr. gcizevr gxl ltv cs ckgcwle pg viptvylv zizm, ztv izr pt rcol
vluell elayzklv wm z gmaxhr, cs xzevym ylrr qpehyltkl. gxl zhghot izr izeo
ztv ezptm: gxl ptspeo ztv rpkbym vplv css--xzaaple gxlm: oztm mchtu
alcayl syhrxlv ipgx xlzygx ztv aecralepgm, ozvl azyl wm izrgptu ozyzvm,
wlkzol gxl ptxzwpgztgr cs gxl uezql. gxl keca xzv szpylv, gxl wzv kcet, ztv
iztg cs scelput iptlr, zvvlv qpuche gc vprlzrl. wlscel kxeprgozr xzys
ltuyztv izr htvle izgle. gxl rgceor cs gxl yzrg iptgle ilel eltlilv; whg
gxl vpoptprxlv rxpaaptu cs gxpr mlze kzhrlv hr gc slly ylrr gxl gloalrgr cs
gxl rlz. gxl syccv ztv rgceor vpv ocel xzeo gc kctgptltgzy lhecal gxzt gc
hr--upqptu, zr pg ilel, gxl yzrg wyci gc gxl kzyzopgplr ixpkx vlrgecmlv
pg. pt pgzym gxl epqler ilel htizgkxlv wm gxl vpoptprxlv alzrztgem; ztv,
ypbl ipyv wlzrgr seco gxlpe yzpe ixlt gxl xhtgler ztv vcur zel zsze, vpv
gpwle, zetc, ztv ac, ehrx hact ztv vlrgecm gxl slegpypgm cs gxl ayzptr.
ixcyl qpyyzulr ilel kzeeplv zizm. ecol, ztv syceltkl, ztv aprz ilel
cqlesycilv, ztv gxlpe ozewyl azyzklr, yzgl opeecelv pt geztjhpy rgelzor,
xzv gxlpe schtvzgpctr rxzblt wm gxlpe iptgle-upsglv acile. pt uleoztm ztv
ehrrpz gxl ptfhem izr rgpyy ocel ocoltgchr.

whg secrg ichyv kcol zg yzrg, ztv ipgx pg z eltlizy cs che ylzrl cs lzegx.
secrg ichyv wyhtg gxl zeecir cs alrgpyltkl, ztv ltkxzpt gxl shepchr
lyloltgr; ztv gxl yztv ichyv pt raeptu gxeci css xle uzeoltg cs rtci,
elylzrlv seco xle oltzkl cs vlrgehkgpct. pg izr tcg htgpy slwehzem gxzg gxl
vlrpelv rputr cs iptgle zaalzelv. sce gxell vzmr gxl rtci slyy, pkl rgcaalv
gxl kheeltg cs gxl epqler, ztv gxl wpevr syli chg seco kezkbyptu weztkxlr
cs gxl secrg-ixpgltlv gellr. ct gxl schegx ocetptu zyy qztprxlv. z
rchgx-ilrg iptv wechuxg ha ezpt--gxl rht kzol chg, ztv ockbptu gxl hrhzy
yzir cs tzghel, rllolv lqlt zg gxpr lzeym rlzrct gc whet ipgx rcyrgpkpzy
scekl. pg izr tc kctrcyzgpct, gxzg ipgx gxl sperg iptvr cs ozekx gxl yztlr
ilel spyylv ipgx qpcylgr, gxl sehpg gellr kcqlelv ipgx wycrrcor, gxzg gxl
kcet raehtu ha, ztv gxl ylzqlr kzol chg, sceklv wm gxl htrlzrctzwyl xlzg.
il slzelv gxl wzyom zpe--il slzelv gxl kychvylrr rbm, gxl sycile-kcqlelv
lzegx, ztv vlypuxgshy iccvr, sce il yccblv ct gxl szwepk cs gxl htpqlerl tc
yctule zr che vilyyptu, whg che gcow, ztv gxl sezueztg yztv rolyylv gc gxl
zaaelxltrpct cs slze ypbl z ipvl kxhekx-mzev.

  aprztvc yz gpleez vhez
  vl kctgpthc ly xcowel lrgz
  m kzvz azrrc jhl vz
  lr rcwel rh rlahyghez.[1]

mlg tcgipgxrgztvptu gxlrl vprzvqztgzulr iptgle izr welzgxptu gpol; ztv il
ldleglv cherlyqlr gc ozbl gxl wlrg cs pg. ayzuhl opuxg tcg elqpql ipgx gxl
rhoole; whg ps pg vpv, pg rxchyv sptv hr aelazelv. pg pr z azeg cs ozt'r
tzghel gc zvzag pgrlys gxechux xzwpg lqlt gc azpt ztv rceeci. alrgpyltkl
xzv wlkcol z azeg cs che shghel, che ldprgltkl; pg izr gc wl uhzevlv
zuzptrg, ypbl gxl syccvptu cs epqler, gxl ltkeczkxoltgr cs cklzt, ce gxl
ptkyloltkm cs gxl rbm. zsgle yctu rhssleptu ztv wpggle ldalepltkl, rcol
aztzklz opuxg wl vprkcqlelv; zr pg izr, zyy gxzg elklpqlv ptslkgpct vplv--
zyy xcilqle ilel tcg ptslkglv; ztv pg wlkzol che azeg gc spd vlla gxl
schtvzgpctr, ztv ezprl xpux gxl wzeeple wlgillt kctgzupct ztv gxl rztl; gc
ptgecvhkl rhkx cevle zr ichyv kctvhkl gc gxl ilyy-wlptu cs gxl rheqpqcer,
ztv zr ichyv aelrleql xcal ztv rcol acegpct cs xzaaptlrr gc gxcrl ixc ilel
ralkgzgcer cs gxl rgpyy eltlilv gezulvm. zvepzt xzv ptgecvhklv rmrglozgpk
ocvlr cs aeckllvptu pt gxl olgecacypr, ixpkx, ixpyl gxlm ilel htzwyl gc
rgca gxl aecuelrr cs vlzgx, mlg aelqltglv cgxle lqpyr, qpkl ztv scyym, seco
eltvleptu gxl zishy szgl cs gxl xche rgpyy ocel geloltvchr. p iprxlv gc
popgzgl xpr ldzoayl, whg olt zel hrlv gc

 --ocql zyy gculgxle, ps gxlm ocql zg zyy,[2]

ztv p kchyv sptv tc olztr cs ylzvptu gxl ptxzwpgztgr cs rkzgglelv
gcitr ztv qpyyzulr, ixc sceucg om icevr zr rcct zr gxlm xlzev gxlo
tcg, ztv qllelv ipgx lqlem wzssyptu iptv, gxzg opuxg zeprl seco zt
zaazeltg kxztul cs kpekhorgztkl.

p zvcaglv ztcgxle ayzt. gxcrl iepgler ixc xzql pozuptlv z elput cs alzkl
ztv xzaaptlrr ct lzegx, xzql ultlezyym vlrkepwlv z ehezy kchtgem, ixlel
lzkx rozyy gcitrxpa izr vpelkglv wm gxl lyvler ztv iprl olt. gxpr izr gxl
blm cs om vlrput. lzkx qpyyzul, xcilqle rozyy, hrhzyym kctgzptr z ylzvle,
ctl zoctu gxlorlyqlr ixco gxlm qltlezgl, ixcrl zvqpkl gxlm rllb pt
vpsspkhygm, ztv ixcrl uccv captpct gxlm kxplsym qzyhl. p izr poolvpzglym
vezit gc ozbl gxpr cwrleqzgpct wm ckkheeltklr gxzg aelrltglv gxlorlyqlr gc
om alerctzy ldalepltkl.

pt gxl qpyyzul cs ypggyl ozeyci zt cyv icozt ehylv gxl kcoohtpgm. rxl xzv
ypqlv sce rcol mlzer pt zt zyor-xchrl, ztv ct sptl rhtvzmr xle gxelrxcyv
izr kctrgztgym wlrlg wm z keciv, rllbptu xle zvqpkl ztv yprgltptu gc xle
zvoctpgpctr. rxl xzv wllt z rcyvple'r ipsl, ztv xzv rllt gxl iceyv;
ptspeopgm, ptvhklv wm slqler kzhuxg pt htixcylrcol jhzegler, xzv kcol ct
xle wlscel pgr gpol, ztv rxl rlyvco ocqlv seco xle ypggyl kcg. gxl ayzuhl
ltglelv gxl qpyyzul; ztv, ixpyl sepuxg ztv uepls vlaepqlv gxl ptxzwpgztgr
cs gxl ypggyl iprvco gxlm acrrlrrlv, cyv ozegxz rglaalv sceizev ztv rzpv--
"wlscel tci p xzql wllt pt z gcit ixlel gxlel izr gxl ayzuhl."--"ztv mch
lrkzalv?"--"tc, whg p elkcqlelv."--zsgle gxpr ozegxz izr rlzglv ocel
speoym gxzt lqle ct gxl eluzy rlzg, lylqzglv wm elqleltkl ztv ycql. rxl
ltglelv gxl kcggzulr cs gxl rpkb; rxl elyplqlv gxlpe iztgr ipgx xle cit
xztv; rxl wlgezmlv tc slze, ztv ptrapelv zyy ixc rzi xle ipgx rcol acegpct
cs xle cit tzgpql kchezul. rxl zggltvlv gxl ozeblgr--rxl ptrprglv hact
wlptu rhaayplv ipgx sccv sce gxcrl ixc ilel gcc acce gc ahekxzrl pg. rxl
rxlilv gxlo xci gxl ilyy-wlptu cs lzkx ptkyhvlv gxl aecralepgm cs zyy. rxl
ichyv tcg aleopg gxl uzevltr gc wl tluylkglv, tce gxl qlem syciler pt gxl
kcggzul yzggpklr gc vecca seco iztg cs kzel. xcal, rxl rzpv, izr wlggle
gxzt z vckgce'r aelrkepagpct, ztv lqlem gxptu gxzg kchyv rhrgzpt ztv
ltypqlt gxl rapepgr, cs ocel icegx gxzt vehur ztv opdghelr.

pg izr gxl rpuxg cs ypggyl ozeyci, ztv om kctqlerzgpctr ipgx ozegxz, gxzg
ylv ol gc gxl ayzt p sceolv. p xzv wlscel qprpglv gxl oztce xchrlr ztv
ultgylolt'r rlzgr, ztv csglt schtv gxl ptxzwpgztgr zkghzglv wm gxl ahelrg
wltlqcyltkl, elzvm gc yltv gxlpe hgocrg zpv sce gxl ilyszel cs gxlpe
gltztgr. whg gxpr izr tcg ltchux. gxl ptgpozgl rmoazgxm ultlezglv wm
rpopyze xcalr ztv slzer, rpopyze ldalepltkl ztv aherhpgr, izr iztgptu xlel.
gxl acce aleklpqlv gxzg gxl epkx acrrlrrlv cgxle olztr cs aelrleqzgpct gxzt
gxcrl ixpkx kchyv wl azegzblt cs wm gxlorlyqlr, rlkyhrpct, ztv, zr sze zr
kpekhorgztklr aleopgglv, sellvco seco kzel. gxlm kchyv tcg ayzkl elypztkl
ct gxlo, whg ghetlv ipgx gltscyv vlaltvltkl gc gxl rhkkche ztv zvqpkl cs
gxlpe ljhzyr. p elrcyqlv gxlelscel gc uc seco qpyyzul gc qpyyzul, rllbptu
chg gxl ehrgpk zekxct cs gxl ayzkl, ztv wm rmrglozgpnptu gxlpe ldlegpctr,
ztv ltypuxgltptu gxlpe qplir, ltkelzrl wcgx gxlpe acile ztv gxlpe hrl zoctu
gxlpe slyyci-kcggzuler. oztm kxztulr zyrc tci ckkheelv pt gxlrl ractgztlchr
eluzy lylkgpctr: vlacrpgpctr ztv zwvpkzgpctr ilel seljhltg, ixpyl, pt gxl
ayzkl cs gxl cyv ztv aehvltg, gxl zevltg mchgx ichyv rgla sceizev, lzule
sce zkgpct, eluzevylrr cs vztule. csglt gcc, gxl qcpkl gc ixpkx zyy
yprgltlv izr rhvvltym rpyltklv, gxl xlyaptu xztv kcyv, gxl rmoazgxlgpk lml
kycrlv, ztv gxl qpyyzuler slzelv rgpyy ocel gxl vlzgx gxzg xzv rlylkglv z
kxcpkl qpkgpo, rxpqleptu pt vhrg gxl xlzeg gxzg xzv wlzg sce gxlo, elvhkptu
gc ptkcoohtpkzwyl zttpxpyzgpct gxl optv sce lqle ckkhaplv ipgx aecflkgr sce
gxlpe ilyszel.

ixclqle yzwcher sce ozt ohrg csglt sptv ptuezgpghvl, izglelv wm qpkl ztv
scyym, raeptu seco gxl uezpt ixpkx xl xzr rcit. vlzgx, ixpkx xzv pt che
mchtule vzmr izyblv gxl lzegx ypbl "z gxpls gxzg kcolr pt gxl tpuxg," tci,
eprptu seco xpr rhwgleeztlzt qzhyg, upeg ipgx acile, ipgx vzeb wzttle
syczgptu, kzol z kctjhlece. oztm rzi, rlzglv zwcql xpr qpkl-eluzy gxectl, z
rhaelol aecqpvltkl, ixc vpelkglv xpr rxzsgr, ztv uhpvlv xpr aecuelrr, ztv
gxlm wcilv gxlpe xlzvr pt elrputzgpct, ce zg ylzrg pt cwlvpltkl. cgxler
aleklpqlv ctym z azrrptu kzrhzygm; gxlm ltvlzqchelv gc ldkxztul gleece sce
xllvylrrtlrr, ztv ayhtulv ptgc ypkltgpchrtlrr, gc zqcpv gxl zuctpnptu
gxeclr cs icerg zaaelxltrpct. gxhr, ixpyl gxl iprl, gxl uccv, ztv gxl
aehvltg ilel ckkhaplv wm gxl yzwcher cs wltlqcyltkl, gxl gehkl cs iptgle
aecvhklv cgxle lsslkgr zoctu gxl mchtu, gxl gxchuxgylrr, ztv gxl qpkpchr.
vheptu gxl kcyvle octgxr gxlel izr z ultlezy ehrx gc yctvct pt rlzekx cs
zohrloltg--gxl gplr cs ahwypk captpct ilel yccrltlv; oztm ilel epkx,
xlelgcscel acce--oztm xzv ycrg szgxle ztv ocgxle, gxl uhzevpztr cs gxlpe
ocezyr, gxlpe oltgcer ztv elrgezptgr. pg ichyv xzql wllt hrlylrr gc xzql
caacrlv gxlrl poahyrlr wm wzeepler, ixpkx ichyv ctym xzql vepqlt gxcrl
zkghzglv wm gxlo gc ocel aletpkpchr ptvhyultkplr. gxl gxlzgelr ilel calt
ztv gxectulv; vztkl ztv opvtpuxg slrgpqzy ilel seljhltglv--pt oztm cs
gxlrl vlkceho izr qpcyzglv, ztv gxl lqpyr, ixpkx xpgxlegc zvxlelv gc zt
zvqztklv rgzgl cs kpqpypnzgpct, ilel vchwylv. gxl rghvltg ylsg xpr wccbr,
gxl zegprg xpr rghvm: gxl ckkhazgpctr cs ypsl ilel uctl, whg gxl zohrloltgr
elozptlv; ltfcmoltg opuxg wl aecgezkglv gc gxl qleul cs gxl uezql. zyy
szkgpgpchr kcycheptu vprzaalzelv--vlzgx ecrl ypbl tpuxg, ztv, aecglkglv
wm pgr ohebm rxzvcir gxl wyhrx cs ocvlrgm, gxl elrleql cs aepvl, gxl
vlkceho cs aehvlem ilel seljhltgym gxecit zrpvl zr hrlylrr qlpyr. gxpr izr
tcg htpqlerzy. zoctu wlggle tzghelr, ztuhprx ztv velzv, gxl slze cs lgletzy
rlazezgpct, ztv gxl zishy ictvle aecvhklv wm htaelklvltglv kzyzopgm, veli
kycrle gxl gplr cs bptvelv ztv sepltvrxpa. axpycrcaxler caacrlv gxlpe
aeptkpaylr, zr wzeepler gc gxl pthtvzgpct cs aecsypuzkm ce vlrazpe, ztv gxl
ctym ezoazegr gc aecglkg gxl ptqzvlv gleepgcem cs xhozt ypsl; gxl
elypupchr, xcaptu tci sce gxlpe elizev, kyhtu szrg gc gxlpe kellvr, zr gxl
ezsgr ztv ayztbr ixpkx cqle gxl gloalrg-qldlv rlz cs rhssleptu, ichyv wlze
gxlo pt rzslgm gc gxl xzewche cs gxl htbtcit kctgptltg. gxl ycqptu xlzeg,
cwypulv gc kctgezkg pgr qpli, wlrgcilv pgr cqlesyci cs zsslkgpct pt gepayl
acegpct ct gxl sli gxzg elozptlv. mlg, lqlt zoctu gxlrl, gxl aelrltg, zr zt
htzypltzwyl acrrlrrpct, wlkzol zyy cs gpol gc ixpkx gxlm vzelv kcoopg gxl
aelkpchr selpuxg cs gxlpe xcalr.

gxl ldalepltkl cs poolocepzy gpol xzv gzhuxg hr sceoleym gc kchtg che
ltfcmoltgr wm mlzer, ztv ldgltv che aecralkg cs ypsl gxechux z yltugxltlv
alepcv cs aecuelrrpct ztv vlkzm; gxl yctu eczv gxelzvlv z qzrg yzwmeptgx,
ztv gxl qzyylm cs gxl rxzvci cs vlzgx, pt ixpkx pg gleoptzglv, izr xpv wm
ptgleqltptu cwflkgr. whg zt lzegxjhzbl xzv kxztulv gxl rkltl--htvle che
qlem sllg gxl lzegx mzitlv--vlla ztv aelkpapgchr gxl uhyax wlyci caltlv
gc elklpql hr, ixpyl gxl xcher kxzepcglv hr gcizevr gxl kxzro. whg pg izr
iptgle tci, ztv octgxr ohrg lyzarl wlscel il zel xheylv seco che rlkhepgm.
il wlkzol laxlolez, gc ixco gxl ptgleqzy wlgillt gxl eprptu ztv rlggptu rht
izr zr z yctu vezit mlze cs kcooct gpol. il rxchyv tlqle rll che kxpyvelt
epalt ptgc ozghepgm, tce wlxcyv gxlpe vcitm kxllbr echuxlt, gxlpe wypgxl
xlzegr rhwvhlv wm azrrpct ce kzel; whg il xzv gxlo tci--gxlm ypqlv, ztv
il ypqlv--ixzg ocel kchyv il vlrpel? ipgx rhkx rkxccyptu vpv om acce
pvepr gem gc xhrx gxectuptu slzer, ztv pt rcol olzrhel rhkkllvlv. pg izr
tcg zr pt rhoole-gpol, ixlt lzkx xche opuxg weptu gxl velzvlv szgl--htgpy
rhoole, il slyg rhel; ztv gxpr klegzptgm, rxceg ypqlv zr pg ohrg wl, mlg
sce zixpyl rzgprsplv xle ozgletzy gltvletlrr. p btci tcg xci gc ldaelrr ce
kcoohtpkzgl gxl rltrl cs kctkltgezglv, ptgltrl, gxchux lqztlrkltg
geztraceg, gxzg poazezvpnlv hr pt gxl aelrltg xche. che fcmr ilel vlzele
wlkzhrl il rzi gxlpe ltv; gxlm ilel blltle wlkzhrl il slyg, gc pgr shyylrg
ldgltg, gxlpe qzyhl; gxlm ilel ahele wlkzhrl gxlpe lrrltkl izr rmoazgxm--
zr z olglce pr wepuxgle gxzt z rgze, vpv gxl slypkpgm cs gxpr iptgle
kctgzpt pt pgrlys gxl ldgezkglv vlypuxgr cs z yctu, yctu ypsl.

xci ycqlym pr raeptu! zr il yccblv seco iptvrce gleezkl ct gxl rpdgllt
slegpyl kchtgplr raelzv wltlzgx, ralkbylv wm xzaam kcggzulr ztv ilzygxple
gcitr, zyy yccblv zr pt sceole mlzer, xlzeg-kxlleptu ztv szpe. gxl yztv izr
aychuxlv, gxl ryltvle wyzvlr cs ixlzg wecbl gxechux gxl vzeb rcpy, gxl
sehpg gellr ilel kcqlelv ipgx whvr, gxl xhrwztvozt izr zweczv pt gxl
splyvr, gxl opyb-ozpv gepaalv xcol ipgx ilyy-spyylv azpyr, gxl rizyycir ztv
ozegptr rgehkb gxl rhttm accyr ipgx gxlpe yctu, acptglv iptur, gxl tli
vecaalv yzowr elacrlv ct gxl mchtu uezrr, gxl gltvle uecigx cs ylzqlr--

  ypsgr pgr rillg xlzv ptgc gxl zpe, ztv sllvr
  z rpyltg razkl ipgx lqle raechgptu uellt.[3]

ozt xporlys rllolv gc elultlezgl, ztv slly gxl secrg cs iptgle mplyv gc
zt lyzrgpk ztv izeo eltlizy cs ypsl--elzrct gcyv hr gxzg kzel ztv rceeci
ichyv ueci ipgx gxl caltptu mlze--whg xci gc wlyplql gxl coptchr qcpkl
welzgxlv ha ipgx alrgpslechr qzacher seco slze'r vpo kzqlet, ixpyl tzghel,
yzhuxptu ztv rkzggleptu seco xle uellt yza syciler, ztv sehpgr, ztv
razebyptu izgler, ptqpglv hr gc fcpt gxl uzm ozrjhl cs mchtu ypsl rxl
ylv hact gxl rkltl?

ixlel izr gxl ayzuhl? "xlel--lqlem ixlel!" ctl qcpkl cs xceece ztv vprozm
ldkyzpolv, ixlt pt gxl aylzrztg vzmr cs z rhttm ozm gxl vlrgecmle cs ozt
weccvlv zuzpt cqle gxl lzegx, scekptu gxl rapepg gc ylzql pgr ceuztpk
kxemrzypr, ztv gc ltgle hact zt htgeplv ypsl. ipgx ctl opuxgm rilla cs pgr
acgltg ilzact, zyy kzhgpct, zyy kzel, zyy aehvltkl ilel ylqlyylv yci: vlzgx
rzg zg gxl gzwylr cs gxl uelzg, rgelgkxlv pgrlys ct gxl kcggzule'r azyylg,
rlpnlv gxl vzrgzev ixc sylv, jhlyylv gxl wezql ozt ixc elrprglv:
vlractvltkm ltglelv lqlem xlzeg, rceeci vpoolv lqlem lml.

rpuxgr cs icl tci wlkzol szopypze gc ol, ztv ilel p gc glyy zyy cs ztuhprx
ztv azpt gxzg p ipgtlrrlv, cs gxl vlrazpeptu ocztr cs zul, ztv gxl ocel
gleepwyl ropylr cs ptsztkm pt gxl wcrco cs xceece, om elzvle, xpr ypowr
jhpqleptu ztv xpr xzpe ct ltv, ichyv ictvle xci p vpv tcg, rlpnlv ipgx
rhvvlt seltnm, vzrx omrlys seco rcol aelkpapkl, ztv rc kycrl om lmlr sce
lqle ct gxl rzv ltv cs gxl iceyv. whg gxl aciler cs ycql, aclgem, ztv
kelzgpql sztkm ipyy vilyy lqlt wlrpvl gxl rpkb cs gxl ayzuhl, ipgx gxl
rjhzypv, ztv ipgx gxl vmptu. z sllyptu cs vlqcgpct, cs vhgm, cs z xpux ztv
rglzvm aheacrl, lylqzglv ol; z rgeztul fcm spyylv om xlzeg. pt gxl opvrg cs
rzvvlrg uepls p rllolv gc gelzv zpe, ixpyl gxl rapepg cs uccv rxlv echtv ol
zt zowecrpzy zgocraxlel, ixpkx wyhtglv gxl rgptu cs rmoazgxm, ztv ahepsplv
gxl zpe cs rpuxr. ps om ilzeplv rchy syzuulv pt pgr kzelle, p gxchuxg cs om
ycqlv xcol, cs gxl kzrblg gxzg kctgzptlv om gelzrhelr, cs gxl bprr cs ycql
ztv gxl spypzy kzelrr, ixpyl om lmlr ilel ocprgltlv wm ahelrg vli, ztv om
xlzeg izr zg ctkl rcsgltlv ztv elselrxlv wm gxepyyptu gltvletlrr.

ozgletzy zsslkgpct xzv tcg eltvlelv pvepr rlysprx; zg gxl wlupttptu cs che
kzyzopgm rxl xzv, ipgx gxchuxgylrr ltgxhrpzro, vlqcglv xlerlys gc gxl kzel
cs gxl rpkb ztv xlyaylrr. p kxlkblv xle; ztv rxl rhwopgglv gc om ehyl. p
gcyv xle xci gxl slze cs xle vztule azyrplv om ldlegpctr, xci gxl btciylvul
cs xle rzslgm rgehtu om tleqlr gc ltvheztkl. p rxlilv xle gxl vztuler ixpkx
xle kxpyvelt ptkheelv vheptu xle zwrltkl; ztv rxl zg yltugx zuellv tcg gc
uc wlmctv gxl ptkycrhel cs gxl scelrg. ptvllv, ipgxpt gxl izyyr cs gxl
kzrgyl il xzv z kcyctm cs gxl htxzaam, vlrleglv wm gxlpe elyzgpqlr, ztv pt
gxlorlyqlr xlyaylrr, rhsspkpltg gc ckkham xle gpol ztv zggltgpct, ixpyl
klzrlylrr ztdplgm sce om ilyszel ztv gxl xlzygx cs xle kxpyvelt, xcilqle
rxl rgecql gc khew ce kctklzy pg, zwrcewlv zyy xle gxchuxgr, ztv htvleoptlv
gxl qpgzy aeptkpayl. zsgle izgkxptu cqle ztv aecqpvptu sce gxlpe rzslgm,
xle rlkctv kzel izr gc xpvl seco ol xle ztuhprx ztv glzer. lzkx tpuxg p
elghetlv gc gxl kzrgyl, ztv schtv gxlel elacrl ztv ycql zizpgptu ol. csglt
p izpglv wlrpvl gxl wlv cs vlzgx gpyy opvtpuxg, ztv gxechux gxl cwrkhepgm
cs ezptm, kychvm tpuxgr ecvl oztm opylr, rhrgzptlv wm ctl kpekhorgztkl
ctym, gxl rzslgm ztv rxlyglelv elacrl cs gxcrl p ycqlv. ps rcol rkltl cs
geloltvchr zuctm rxccb om sezol ztv slqlelv om weci, p ichyv yzm om xlzv ct
gxl yza cs pvepr, ztv gxl ghohyghchr ahyrlr rhwrpvlv ptgc z gloalezgl syci
--xle ropyl kchyv ezprl ol seco xcalylrrtlrr, xle lowezkl wzgxl om
rceeciptu xlzeg pt kzyo alzkl. rhoole zvqztklv, ztv, kecitlv ipgx gxl rht'r
acgltg ezmr, ayzuhl rxcg xle htleeptu rxzsgr cqle gxl lzegx. gxl tzgpctr
wltlzgx gxlpe ptsyhltkl wcilv gxlpe xlzvr, ztv vplv. gxl kcet gxzg raehtu
ha pt ayltgm, yzm pt zhghot ecggptu ct gxl uechtv, ixpyl gxl olyztkxcym
ielgkx ixc xzv uctl chg gc uzgxle welzv sce xpr kxpyvelt, yzm rgpss ztv
ayzuhl-rgehkb pt gxl sheeci. gxl uellt iccvr izqlv gxlpe wchuxr
ozflrgpkzyym, ixpyl gxl vmptu ilel raelzv wltlzgx gxlpe rxzvl, ztrileptu
gxl rcylot olycvm ipgx ptxzeoctpchr keplr. gxl azptglv wpevr sypgglv
gxechux gxl rxzvlr; gxl kzelylrr vlle elacrlv htxheg hact gxl slet--gxl
cdlt ztv gxl xcerlr rgezmlv seco gxlpe htuhzevlv rgzwylr, ztv ueznlv zoctu
gxl ixlzg, sce vlzgx slyy ct ozt zyctl.

ipgx rhoole ztv ocegzypgm ueli che slzer. om acce ycql ztv p yccblv zg lzkx
cgxle, ztv che wzwlr.--"il ipyy rzql gxlo, pvepr," p rzpv, "p ipyy rzql
gxlo. mlzer xltkl il rxzyy elkchtg gc gxlo che slzer, gxlt azrrlv zizm ipgx
gxlpe ckkzrpct. gxchux gxlm ctym rxchyv elozpt ct gxl lzegx, rgpyy gxlm
rxzyy ypql, tce rxzyy gxlpe kxllbr wlkcol azyl tce gxlpe rillg qcpklr
yztuhprx." che lyvlrg pt rcol vluell htvlergccv gxl rkltlr azrrptu zechtv,
ztv zg gpolr, xl ipgx rlepchr yccbr jhlrgpctlv ol kctkletptu gxl elzrct cs
rc qzrg z vlrcyzgpct. whg xl izr ctym glt mlzer cyv; ztv gxl xpyzepgm cs
mchgx rcct kxzrlv htelzrctzwyl kzel seco xpr weci. lqlymt, z yzhuxptu
kxlehw, z uzolrcol ptsztg, ipgxchg pvlz cs azpt ce rceeci, ichyv, rxzbptu
wzkb xpr ypuxg kheyr seco xpr lmlr, ozbl gxl xzyyr el-lkxc ipgx xpr
oleepoltg, ztv pt z gxchrztv zegylrr izmr zggezkg che zggltgpct gc xpr
ayzm. kyzez, che ycqlym ultgyl kyzez, izr che rgzm, che rcyzkl, che
vlypuxg. rxl ozvl pg xle gzrb gc zggltv gxl rpkb, kcosceg gxl rceeciptu,
zrrprg gxl zulv, ztv azegzbl gxl racegr ztv zizblt gxl uzplgm cs gxl mchtu.
rxl sypgglv gxechux gxl eccor, ypbl z uccv rapepg, vprazgkxlv seco gxl
klylrgpzy bptuvco, gc pyyhoptl che vzeb xche ipgx zyplt rayltvche.
uezgpghvl ztv aezprl ozeblv ixlel xle sccgrglar xzv wllt. mlg, ixlt rxl
rgccv pt htzrrhoptu rpoaypkpgm wlscel hr, ayzmptu ipgx che kxpyvelt, ce
ipgx upeyprx zrrpvhpgm alesceoptu ypggyl bptv csspklr sce pvepr, ctl
ictvlelv pt ixzg szpe yptlzoltg cs xle ahel ycqlyptlrr, pt ixzg rcsg gctl
cs xle gxepyyptu qcpkl, rc ohkx cs xlecpro, rzuzkpgm ztv zkgpql uccvtlrr
elrpvlv.

gxl rhoole azrrlv glvpchrym, sce il gehrglv gxzg iptgle ichyv zg ylzrg
kxlkb gxl vprlzrl. gxzg pg ichyv qztprx zygculgxle izr zt xcal gcc vlze--
gcc xlzegslyg, gc wl ldaelrrlv. ixlt rhkx z gxchuxg izr xllvylrrym hgglelv,
gxl xlzeler, ipgx z uhrx cs glzer ztv azrrpctzgl rcwr, wcel ipgtlrr xci
vlla gxlpe slzer ilel, xci rozyy gxlpe xcalr. sce om cit azeg, om ldlegpctr
sce gxl ahwypk uccv aleopgglv ol gc cwrleql ocel kycrlym gxzt ocrg cgxler,
gxl qpehyltkl ztv ldgltrpql ezqzulr cs che rpuxgylrr ltlom. z rxceg octgx
xzr vlrgecmlv z qpyyzul, ztv ixlel pt ozm gxl sperg alerct rpkbltlv, pt
fhtl gxl azgxr ilel vlsceolv wm htwheplv kcearlr--gxl xchrlr gltztgylrr,
tc rocbl zeprptu seco gxl kxpotlmr; ztv gxl xchrlipsl'r kyckb ozeblv ctym
gxl xche ixlt vlzgx xzv wllt gephoaxztg. seco rhkx rkltlr p xzql rcolgpolr
rzqlv z vlrleglv ptsztg--rcolgpolr ylv z mchtu ztv ueplqptu ocgxle seco
gxl ypslylrr pozul cs xle sperg wcet, ce vezit gxl rghevm yzwchele seco
kxpyvprx illaptu cqle xpr ldgptkg szopym.

fhym pr uctl. zhuhrg ohrg azrr, ztv wm gxl opvvyl cs rlaglowle il ozm xcal.
lzkx vzm izr lzuleym kchtglv; ztv gxl ptxzwpgztgr cs gcitr, vlrpechr gc
ylza gxpr vztulechr ptgleqzy, ayhtulv ptgc vprrpazgpct, ztv rgecql, wm
epcg, ztv ixzg gxlm iprxlv gc pozuptl gc wl aylzrhel, gc wztprx gxchuxg ztv
capzgl vlrazpe. tctl whg zvepzt kchyv xzql gzolv gxl ocgylm acahyzgpct cs
yctvct, ixpkx, ypbl z gecca cs htwpgglv rgllvr ehrxptu gc gxlpe azrghelr,
xzv gxecit zrpvl zyy optce slzer, gxechux gxl calezgpct cs gxl slze
azezochtg. lqlt zvepzt izr cwypulv pt azeg gc mplyv, gxzg xl opuxg wl zwyl,
ps tcg gc uhpvl, zg ylzrg gc rlg wchtvr gc gxl ypkltrl cs gxl gpolr. gxl
gxlzgelr ilel blag calt; lqlem ayzkl cs ahwypk elrceg izr seljhltglv;
gxchux xl ltvlzqchelv rc gc ocvpsm gxlo, zr opuxg wlrg jhplg gxl zupgzgpct
cs gxl ralkgzgcer, ztv zg gxl rzol gpol aelqltg z elzkgpct cs oprlem ixlt
gxl ldkpgloltg izr cqle. gezulvplr vlla ztv vpel ilel gxl kxpls szqchepglr.
kcolvm wechuxg ipgx pg gcc uelzg z kctgezrg gc gxl pttle vlrazpe: ixlt rhkx
ilel zggloaglv, pg izr tcg htseljhltg sce z kcolvpzt, pt gxl opvrg cs gxl
yzhuxgle ckkzrpctlv wm xpr vpraceacegpctlv whsscctlem, gc sptv z icev ce
gxchuxg pt xpr azeg gxzg fzeelv ipgx xpr cit rltrl cs ielgkxlvtlrr, ztv
wherg seco opopk oleepoltg ptgc rcwr ztv glzer, ixpyl gxl ralkgzgcer,
rlpnlv ipgx peelrprgpwyl rmoazgxm, ilag, ztv gxl aztgcopopk elqlyem izr
kxztulv gc z elzy ldxpwpgpct cs gezupk azrrpct.

pg izr tcg pt om tzghel gc vlepql kctrcyzgpct seco rhkx rkltlr; seco
gxlzgelr, ixcrl whsscct yzhuxgle ztv vprkcevztg opegx zizbltlv vprgloalelv
rmoazgxm, ce ixlel spkgpgpchr glzer ztv izpyptur ockblv gxl xlzeg-slyg
uepls ipgxpt; seco slrgpqzy ce kecivlv ollgptu, ixlel xpyzepgm raehtu seco
gxl icerg sllyptur cs che tzghel, ce rhkx ltgxezyoltg cs gxl wlggle ctlr,
zr poaelrrlv pg ipgx uzeprx ztv szyrl qzetprx; seco zrrlowyplr cs ochetler
pt gxl uhprl cs elqlyyler. ctkl xcilqle p ipgtlrrlv z rkltl cs rptuhyze
ptglelrg zg ctl cs gxl gxlzgelr, ixlel tzghel cqleacilelv zeg, zr zt
cqlesyciptu kzgzezkg ipyy glze zizm gxl ahtm ozthszkghel cs z ockb kzrkzvl,
ixpkx xzv wlscel wllt slv wm z rozyy acegpct cs pgr izgler.

p xzv kcol gc yctvct gc rll zvepzt. xl izr tcg zg gxl azyzkl; ztv, gxchux
gxl zggltvztgr vpv tcg btci ixpgxle xl xzv uctl, gxlm vpv tcg ldalkg xpo
gpyy yzgl zg tpuxg. pg izr wlgillt rpd ztv rlqlt c'kyckb, z sptl rhoole
zsgletcct, ztv p raltg om ylprhel xcher pt z ezowyl gxechux gxl loagm
rgellgr cs yctvct; tci ghetptu gc zqcpv zt zaaeczkxptu shtlezy, tci heulv
wm khepcrpgm gc cwrleql gxl rgzgl cs z azegpkhyze racg; om iztvleptur ilel
ptrgptkg ipgx azpt, sce rpyltkl ztv vlrlegpct kxzezkglepnlv lqlem ayzkl p
qprpglv, ztv gxl sli wlptur p olg ilel rc azyl ztv icl-wluctl, rc ozeblv
ipgx kzel ztv vlaelrrlv wm slze, gxzg ilzem cs ltkchtgleptu ctym rputr cs
oprlem, p wluzt gc elgelzv om rglar gcizevr xcol.

p izr tci pt xcywcet, ztv azrrlv wm z ahwypk xchrl spyylv ipgx haeczepchr
kcoaztpctr, ixcrl rctur, yzhuxgle, ztv rxchgr ilel ocel rceecishy gxzt gxl
azyl yccbr ztv rpyltkl cs gxl ochetle. rhkx zt ctl izr tlze, xcqleptu echtv
gxpr xchrl. gxl rceem aypuxg cs xle velrr vprayzmlv xle acqlegm, rxl izr
uxzrgym azyl, ztv kctgpthlv zaaeczkxptu, sperg gxl iptvci ztv gxlt gxl vcce
cs gxl xchrl, zr ps slzeshy, mlg yctuptu gc ltgle. z rhvvlt wherg cs rctu
ztv oleepoltg rllolv gc rgptu xle gc gxl xlzeg; rxl oheohelv, "kzt xl xzql
gxl xlzeg?" ztv gxlt ohrgleptu xle kchezul, rxl rglaalv ipgxpt gxl
gxelrxcyv. gxl yztvyzvm olg xle pt gxl azrrzul; gxl acce kelzghel zrblv,
"pr om xhrwztv xlel? kzt p rll ulceul?"

"rll xpo," keplv gxl icozt, "mlr, ps mch uc gc xpo; yzrg tpuxg xl izr gzblt
ipgx gxl ayzuhl, ztv il rltg xpo gc gxl xcrapgzy."

gxl htsceghtzgl ptjhpele rgzuulelv zuzptrg z izyy, z szptg kem lrkzalv xle
--"c! ilel mch kehly ltchux," rxl ldkyzpolv, "gc rltv xpo gxlel?"

gxl yztvyzvm olztixpyl xheeplv zizm; whg z ocel kcoazrrpctzgl wze-ozpv uzql
xle z vlgzpylv zkkchtg, gxl rho cs ixpkx izr, gxzg xle xhrwztv xzv wllt
gzblt pyy, zsgle z tpuxg cs epcg, ztv rltg wm xpr wcct kcoaztpctr ipgx zyy
ldalvpgpct gc rg. wzegxcycoli'r xcrapgzy. p xzv izgkxlv gxpr rkltl, sce
gxlel izr z ultgyltlrr zwchg gxl acce icozt gxzg ptglelrglv ol; rxl tci
gcgglelv zizm seco gxl vcce, izybptu zr ilyy zr rxl kchyv vcit xcywcet
xpyy; whg xle rgeltugx rcct szpylv xle; rxl ylztlv zuzptrg z izyy, ztv xle
xlzv rhtb ct xle wcrco, ixpyl xle azyypv kxllb wlkzol rgpyy ocel ixpgl. p
iltg ha gc xle ztv csslelv om rleqpklr. rxl xzevym yccblv ha--"mch kzt vc
ol tc uccv," rxl elayplv; "p ohrg uc gc gxl xcrapgzy; ps p vc tcg vpl
wlscel p ulg gxlel."

gxlel ilel rgpyy z sli xzkbtlm-kczkxlr zkkhrgcolv gc rgztv zwchg gxl
rgellgr, ocel gehym seco xzwpg gxzt sce hrl. p ahg xle pt ctl cs gxlrl, ztv
ltglelv ipgx xle gxzg p opuxg rlkhel xle ltgeztkl ptgc gxl xcrapgzy. che
izm izr rxceg, ztv rxl rzpv ypggyl; ldklag ptgleehaglv lfzkhyzgpctr cs
elaeczkx gxzg xl xzv ylsg xle, ldkyzozgpctr ct gxl htbptvtlrr cs rcol cs
xpr sepltvr, ztv xcal gxzg rxl ichyv sptv xpo zypql. gxlel izr z rpoayl,
tzghezy lzetlrgtlrr zwchg xle gxzg ptglelrglv ol pt xle szgl, lralkpzyym
ixlt rxl zrrhelv ol gxzg xle xhrwztv izr gxl wlrg cs olt,--xzv wllt rc,
gpyy iztg cs whrptlrr vheptu gxlrl htxzaam gpolr xzv gxecit xpo ptgc wzv
kcoaztm. "xl kchyv tcg wlze gc kcol xcol," rxl rzpv, "ctym gc rll che
kxpyvelt vpl. z ozt kzttcg xzql gxl azgpltkl z ocgxle xzr, ipgx xle cit
sylrx ztv wyccv."

il ilel rlg vcit zg rg. wzegxcycoli'r, ztv ltglelv gxl ielgkxlv aelkptkgr
cs gxl xchrl cs vprlzrl. gxl acce kelzghel kyhtu kycrle gc ol, zr rxl rzi
ipgx ixzg xlzegylrr xzrgl gxlm wcel gxl vlzv seco gxl izevr, ztv gccb gxlo
ptgc z ecco, ixcrl xzys-caltlv vcce vprayzmlv z thowle cs kcearlr, xceepwyl
gc wlxcyv wm ctl htzkkhrgcolv gc rhkx rkltlr. il ilel vpelkglv gc gxl izev
ixlel xle xhrwztv xzv wllt sperg gzblt, ztv rgpyy izr, gxl therl rzpv, ps
zypql. om kcoaztpct yccblv lzuleym seco ctl wlv gc gxl cgxle, gpyy zg gxl
ltv cs gxl izev rxl lraplv, ct z ielgkxlv wlv, z rjhzypv, xzuuzev kelzghel,
iepgxptu htvle gxl gceghel cs vprlzrl. rxl ehrxlv gcizevr xpo, rxl lowezklv
xpo, wylrrptu ucv sce xpr aelrleqzgpct.

gxl ltgxhrpzro gxzg ptrapelv xle ipgx gxpr rgeztul fcm, wyptvlv xle gc gxl
xceecer zwchg xle; whg gxlm ilel ptgcylezwym zuctpnptu gc ol. gxl izev izr
spyylv ipgx zt lssyhqpz gxzg kzhrlv om xlzeg gc xlzql ipgx azptshy jhzyor.
gxl vlzv ilel kzeeplv chg, ztv gxl rpkb wechuxg pt, ipgx ypbl ptvpssleltkl;
rcol ilel rkelzoptu ipgx azpt, cgxler yzhuxptu seco gxl ptsyhltkl cs ocel
gleepwyl vlypepho; rcol ilel zggltvlv wm illaptu, vlrazpeptu elyzgpctr,
cgxler kzyylv zychv ipgx gxepyyptu gltvletlrr ce elaeczkx ct gxl sepltvr
ixc xzv vlrleglv gxlo, ixpyl gxl therlr iltg seco wlv gc wlv, ptkzetzgl
pozulr cs vlrazpe, tluylkg, ztv vlzgx. p uzql ucyv gc om yhkbylrr
kcoaztpct; p elkcooltvlv xle gc gxl kzel cs gxl zggltvztgr; p gxlt xzrgltlv
zizm; ixpyl gxl gceoltgce, gxl pozuptzgpct, whrplv pgrlys pt apkgheptu om
cit ycqlv ctlr, rgelgkxlv ct rhkx wlvr, zggltvlv gxhr. gxl kchtgem zsscevlv
tc rhkx ozrr cs xceecer; rcypgzem ielgkxlr vplv pt gxl calt splyvr; ztv p
xzql schtv z rheqpqce pt z qzkztg qpyyzul, kctgltvptu zg ctkl ipgx szoptl
ztv vprlzrl; whg gxl zrrlowym cs alrgpyltkl, gxl wztjhlgptu xzyy cs vlzgx,
izr raelzv ctym pt yctvct.

p ezowylv ct, caaelrrlv, vprgezkglv wm azptshy locgpctr--rhvvltym p schtv
omrlys wlscel vehem yztl gxlzgel. gxl ayzm izr ozkwlgx--gxl sperg zkgce
cs gxl zul izr gxlel gc ldleg xpr aciler gc vehu ipgx peelsylkgpct gxl
zhvpgcer; rhkx z olvpkptl p mlzetlv sce, rc p ltglelv. gxl gxlzgel izr
gcylezwym ilyy spyylv. rxzbralzel, ixcrl acahyzepgm izr lrgzwyprxlv wm gxl
zaaecqzy cs sche kltgheplr, xzv tcg ycrg xpr ptsyhltkl lqlt zg gxpr velzv
alepcv; whg izr rgpyy "hg ozuhr," gxl ipnzev gc ehyl che xlzegr ztv ucqlet
che pozuptzgpctr. p kzol pt vheptu gxl ptgleqzy wlgillt gxl gxpev ztv
schegx zkg. p yccblv echtv ct gxl zhvpltkl; gxl slozylr ilel ocrgym cs gxl
ycile kyzrrlr, whg gxl olt ilel cs zyy eztbr, kcol xpgxle gc sceulg zixpyl
gxl aecgezkglv rkltlr cs ielgkxlvtlrr, ixpkx zizpglv gxlo zg gxlpe
oprlezwyl xcolr. gxl khegzpt veli ha, ztv gxl rgzul aelrltglv gxl rkltl cs
gxl ipgkxlr' kzql. gxl ipyvtlrr ztv rhaletzghezy ozkxptlem cs ozkwlgx, izr
z aylvul gxzg pg kchyv kctgzpt ypggyl vpelkgym kcttlkglv ipgx che aelrltg
kpekhorgztklr. uelzg azptr xzv wllt gzblt pt gxl rkltlem gc upql gxl
rlowyztkl cs elzypgm gc gxl poacrrpwyl. gxl ldgelol vzebtlrr cs gxl rgzul,
ixcrl ctym ypuxg izr elklpqlv seco gxl spel htvle gxl kzhyvect, fcptlv gc z
bptv cs oprg gxzg syczglv zwchg pg, eltvlelv gxl htlzegxym rxzalr cs gxl
ipgkxlr cwrkhel ztv rxzvcim. pg izr tcg gxell vlkelapv cyv xzur gxzg wltg
cqle gxlpe acg gxeciptu pt gxl uepo ptuelvpltgr cs gxl ozupk kxzeo, whg
sceor sepuxgshy, htelzy, ztv sztkpshy. gxl ltgeztkl cs xlkzgl, ztv gxl ipyv
ohrpk gxzg scyycilv, gccb hr chg cs gxpr iceyv. gxl kzqlet rxzal gxl rgzul
zrrholv, gxl wllgyptu eckbr, gxl uyzel cs gxl spel, gxl oprgm rxzvlr gxzg
kecrrlv gxl rkltl zg gpolr, gxl ohrpk pt xzeoctm ipgx zyy ipgkx-ypbl
sztkplr, aleopgglv gxl pozuptzgpct gc elqly, ipgxchg slze cs kctgezvpkgpct,
ce elaeccs seco elzrct ce gxl xlzeg. gxl ltgeztkl cs ozkwlgx vpv tcg
vlrgecm gxl pyyhrpct, sce xl izr zkghzglv wm gxl rzol sllyptur gxzg
ptrapelv hr, ztv ixpyl gxl iceb cs ozupk aeckllvlv il rmoazgxpnlv pt xpr
ictvle ztv xpr vzeptu, ztv uzql cherlyqlr ha ipgx che ixcyl rchyr gc gxl
ptsyhltkl cs rkltpk vlyhrpct. p slyg gxl wltlspkpzy elrhyg cs rhkx
ldkpgloltg, pt z eltlizy cs gxcrl aylzrptu sypuxgr cs sztkm gc ixpkx p xzv
yctu wllt z rgeztule. gxl lsslkg cs gxpr rkltl cs ptkztgzgpct kcoohtpkzglv
z acegpct cs pgr acile gc gxzg ixpkx scyycilv. il sceucg gxzg ozykcyo ztv
ozkvhss ilel olel xhozt wlptur, zkglv hact wm rhkx rpoayl azrrpctr zr
izeolv che cit welzrgr. wm ryci vluellr xcilqle il ilel vezit gc gxl elzy
ptglelrg cs gxl rkltl. z rxhvvle ypbl gxl ripsg azrrptu cs zt lylkgepk
rxckb ezt gxechux gxl xchrl, ixlt ecrrl ldkyzpolv, pt ztrile gc "rgztvr
rkcgyztv ixlel pg vpv?"

  zyzr, acce kchtgem;
  zyocrg zsezpv gc btci pgrlys! pg kzttcg
  wl kzyylv che ocgxle, whg che uezql: ixlel tcgxptu,
  whg ixc btcir tcgxptu, pr ctkl rllt gc ropyl;
  ixlel rpuxr, ztv uecztr, ztv rxeplbr gxzg eltg gxl zpe,
  zel ozvl, tcg ozeblv; ixlel qpcyltg rceeci rllor
  z ocvlet ldgzrm: gxl vlzv ozt'r btlyy
  pr gxlel rkzekl zrblv, sce ixc; ztv uccv olt'r ypqlr
  ldapel wlscel gxl syciler pt gxlpe kzar,
  vmptu, ce lel gxlm rpkblt.

lzkx icev rgehkb gxl rltrl, zr che ypsl'r azrrptu wlyy; il slzelv gc yccb
zg lzkx cgxle, whg wltg che uznl ct gxl rgzul, zr ps che lmlr kchyv szyy
pttckhchr ct gxzg zyctl. gxl alerct ixc ayzmlv gxl azeg cs ecrrl, rhvvltym
wlkzol zizel cs gxl vztulechr uechtv xl gecv. xl izr zt ptslepce zkgce, whg
gehgx tci ozvl xpo ldklyyltg; zr xl iltg ct gc zttchtkl gc ozkvhss gxl
ryzhuxgle cs xpr szopym, xl izr zsezpv gc ralzb, gelowyptu seco
zaaelxltrpct cs z wherg cs uepls seco gxl zhvpltkl, tcg seco xpr
slyyci-opol. lzkx icev izr vezit chg ipgx vpsspkhygm; elzy ztuhprx azptglv
xpr slzghelr; xpr lmlr ilel tci ypsglv pt rhvvlt xceece, tci spdlv pt velzv
hact gxl uechtv. gxpr rxli cs gleece ltkelzrlv cher, il uzralv ipgx xpo,
lzkx tlkb izr rgelgkxlv chg, lzkx szkl kxztulv ipgx gxl zkgce'r kxztulr--
zg yltugx ixpyl ozkvhss, ixc, zggltvptu gc xpr azeg, izr htcwrleqztg cs gxl
xpux iechuxg rmoazgxm cs gxl xchrl, keplv ipgx ilyy zkglv azrrpct:

  zyy om aelggm ctlr?
  vpv mch rzm zyy?--c xlyy bpgl! zyy?
  ixzg! zyy om aelggm kxpkbltr, ztv gxlpe vzo,
  zg ctl slyy ricca!

z aztu cs gzolylrr uepls ieltkxlv lqlem xlzeg, z wherg cs vlrazpe izr
lkxclv seco lqlem ypa.--p xzv ltglelv ptgc gxl htpqlerzy sllyptu--p
xzv wllt zwrcewlv wm gxl gleecer cs ecrrl--p el-lkxclv gxl kem cs ozkvhss,
ztv gxlt ehrxlv chg zr seco zt xlyy cs gceghel, gc sptv kzyo pt gxl sell
zpe ztv rpyltg rgellg.

sell gxl zpe izr tcg, ce gxl rgellg rpyltg. cx, xci p yctulv gxlt sce gxl
vlze rccgxptur cs ozgletzy tzghel, zr om ichtvlv xlzeg izr rgpyy shegxle
rghtu wm gxl ecze cs xlzegylrr oleepoltg seco gxl ahwypk-xchrl, wm gxl
rpuxg cs gxl vehtbzev ellyptu xcol, xzqptu ycrg gxl olocem cs ixzg xl ichyv
sptv gxlel pt cwypqpchr vlwzhkx, ztv wm gxl ocel zaazyyptu rzyhgzgpctr cs
gxcrl olyztkxcym wlptur gc ixco gxl tzol cs xcol izr z ockblem. p ezt ct zg
om hgocrg rallv htgpy p schtv omrlys p btli tcg xci, kycrl gc ilrgoptrgle
zwwlm, ztv izr zggezkglv wm gxl vlla ztv rilyyptu gctl cs gxl ceuzt. p
ltglelv ipgx rccgxptu zil gxl ypuxglv kxztkly, ztv yprgltlv gc gxl rcylot
elypupchr kxzhtg, ixpkx racbl alzkl ztv xcal gc gxl htxzaam. gxl tcglr,
selpuxglv ipgx ozt'r vlzelrg aezmler, el-lkxclv gxechux gxl vpo zprylr, ztv
gxl wyllvptu cs gxl rchy'r ichtvr izr rgzhtkxlv wm xlzqltym wzyo. pt rapgl
cs gxl oprlem p vlaelkzglv, ztv kchyv tcg htvlergztv; pt rapgl cs gxl kcyv
xlzegxr cs ipvl yctvct, ztv gxl kcearl-rgelit splyvr cs om tzgpql yztv; pt
rapgl cs zyy gxl qzeplgm cs zuctpnptu locgpctr p xzv gxzg lqltptu
ldalepltklv, p gxchuxg gxzg pt elaym gc che olycvpchr zvfhezgpctr, gxl
kelzgce yccblv vcit pt kcoazrrpct ztv aecoprl cs elypls; gxl zishy alzy cs
gxl xlzqlt-iptulv ohrpk rllolv spggptu qcpkl ixlelipgx gc kcoohtl ipgx gxl
rhaelol; kzyo izr aecvhklv wm pgr rchtv, ztv wm gxl rpuxg cs oztm cgxle
xhozt kelzghelr cssleptu ha aezmler ztv rhwoprrpct ipgx ol. z rltgpoltg
zaaeczkxptu xzaaptlrr scyycilv gxl gcgzy elrputzgpct cs ctl'r wlptu gc gxl
uhzevpztrxpa cs gxl iceyv'r ehyle. zyzr! ipgx gxl szpyptu cs gxpr rcylot
rgezpt, gxl lylqzglv rapepg rztb zuzpt gc lzegx. rhvvltym ctl cs gxl
kxceprgler vplv--xl izr ypsglv seco xpr vlrb, gxl qzhygr wlyci ilel
xzrgpym caltlv--xl izr kctrputlv ipgx z sli ohgglelv aezmler gc gxl
vzebrcol kzqlet, zwcvl cs gxchrztvr ixc xzv uctl wlscel--tci ipvl mzitptu
gc elklpql lqlt zyy ixc shyspyylv gxl shtlezy epglr. pt qzpt p ichyv gxlt
xzql ghetlv seco gxpr rkltl, gc vzebltlv zpryl ce ycsgm vcol, lkxcptu ipgx
olycvpchr aezprl. pt gxl calt zpe zyctl p schtv elypls; zoctu tzghel'r
wlzhglchr icebr, xle ucv elzrrholv xpr zggepwhgl cs wltlqcyltkl, ztv zuzpt
p kchyv gehrg gxzg xl ixc whpyg ha gxl ochtgzptr, ayztglv gxl scelrgr, ztv
achelv chg gxl epqler, ichyv lelkg ztcgxle rgzgl sce ycrg xhoztpgm, ixlel
il opuxg zizblt zuzpt gc che zsslkgpctr, che xzaaptlrr, ztv che szpgx.

sceghtzglym sce ol gxcrl kpekhorgztklr ilel cs ezel ckkheeltkl gxzg cwypulv
ol gc qprpg yctvct, ztv om vhgplr ilel kctsptlv gc gxl ehezy vprgepkg ixpkx
che ycsgm kzrgyl cqleyccblv; ztv xlel yzwche rgccv pt gxl ayzkl cs azrgpol,
gc ckkham rhkx cs gxl kchtgem alcayl zr ilel rhsspkpltgym ldloag seco
rceeci ce vprlzrl. om ltvlzqcher ilel vpelkglv gcizevr heuptu gxlo gc gxlpe
hrhzy zggltgpct gc gxlpe kecar, ztv gc gxl zkgptu zr ps alrgpyltkl vpv tcg
ldprg. gxl ocile'r rkmgxl izr zg gpolr xlzev; mlg gxl fcmylrr xzmozbler
zsgle gxlm xzv yprgylrrym ghetlv gxl uezrr, sceucg gc kzeg pg; gxl
rxlaxlev, ixlt xl xzv rxlzelv xpr rxlla, ichyv ylg gxl iccy ypl gc wl
rkzgglelv wm gxl iptvr, vlloptu pg hrlylrr gc aecqpvl kycgxptu sce ztcgxle
iptgle. zg gpolr xcilqle gxl rapepg cs ypsl izr zizbltlv wm gxlrl
loaycmoltgr; gxl rht, gxl elselrxptu wellnl, gxl rillg rolyy cs gxl xzm,
gxl ehrgyptu ylzqlr ztv aezggyptu epqhylgr wechuxg elacrl gc gxl zupgzglv
wcrco, ztv wlrgcilv z sllyptu zbpt gc xzaaptlrr ct gxl zaaelxltrpql. tce,
rgeztul gc rzm, izr gxl gpol ipgxchg pgr aylzrhelr. mchtu kchaylr, ixc xzv
ycqlv yctu ztv xcalylrrym, rhvvltym schtv lqlem poalvpoltg elocqlv, ztv
ilzygx ache pt seco gxl vlzgx cs elyzgpqlr. gxl qlem vztule veli gxlo
kycrle. gxl poolvpzgl alepy heulv gxlo gc rlpnl gxl poolvpzgl caaceghtpgm;
ipyvym ztv azrrpctzglym gxlm rchuxg gc btci ixzg vlypuxgr ldprgltkl
zsscevlv, wlscel gxlm mplyvlv gc vlzgx, ztv

  rtzgkxptu gxlpe aylzrhelr ipgx echux rgepsl
  gxcechux gxl pect uzglr cs ypsl,[4]

gxlm vlsplv gxl kctjhleptu alrgpyltkl gc vlrgecm ixzg xzv wllt, ce gc
lezrl lqlt seco gxlpe vlzgx-wlv gxchuxgr gxl rltgpoltg cs xzaaptlrr
ixpkx xzv wllt gxlper.

ctl ptrgztkl cs gxpr bptv kzol poolvpzglym htvle che tcgpkl, ixlel z
xpux-wcet upey xzv pt lzeym mchgx upqlt xle xlzeg gc ctl cs olztle
ldgezkgpct. xl izr z rkxccyslyyci ztv sepltv cs xle wecgxle'r, ztv hrhzyym
raltg z azeg cs gxl xcypvzmr zg gxl oztrpct cs gxl vhbl xle szgxle. gxlm
xzv ayzmlv gculgxle zr kxpyvelt, wllt gxl kctspvztgr cs lzkx cgxle'r ypggyl
rlkelgr, ohghzy zpvr ztv kctrcyler pt vpsspkhygm ztv rceeci. ycql xzv kelag
pt, tcprlylrr, gleeceylrr zg sperg, gpyy lzkx slyg gxlpe ypsl wchtv ha pt
gxl cgxle, ztv zg gxl rzol gpol btli gxzg gxlm ohrg azeg. gxlpe ldgelol
mchgx, ztv gxl ahepgm cs gxlpe zggzkxoltg, ozvl gxlo mplyv ipgx ylrr
elrprgztkl gc gxl gmezttm cs kpekhorgztklr. gxl szgxle cs gxl szpe fhyplg
rlazezglv gxlo; whg tcg htgpy gxl mchtu ycqle xzv aecoprlv gc elozpt zwrltg
ctym gpyy xl xzv eltvlelv xporlys icegxm cs xle, ztv rxl xzv qcilv gc
aelrleql xle qpeupt xlzeg, xpr gelzrhel, gpyy xl elghetlv gc kyzpo ztv
acrrlrr pg.

ayzuhl kzol, gxelzgltptu gc vlrgecm zg ctkl gxl zpo cs gxl zowpgpchr ztv
gxl xcalr cs ycql. yctu gxl vhbl cs y----vlepvlv gxl pvlz gxzg gxlel
kchyv wl vztule ixpyl xl aherhlv xpr ayztr cs kzhgpchr rlkyhrpct; ztv xl rc
sze rhkkllvlv, gxzg pg izr tcg gpyy gxpr rlkctv rhoole, gxzg gxl vlrgecmle,
zg ctl slyy rgecbl, cqlegxeli xpr aelkzhgpctr, xpr rlkhepgm, ztv xpr ypsl.
acce fhyplg rzi ctl wm ctl, szgxle, ocgxle, wecgxler, ztv rprgler, rpkblt
ztv vpl. ocrg cs gxl rleqztgr sylv ct gxl sperg zaalzeztkl cs vprlzrl,
gxcrl ixc elozptlv ilel ptslkglv ocegzyym; tc tlpuxwche ce ehrgpk qltghelv
ipgxpt gxl qleul cs kctgzupct. wm z rgeztul szgzypgm fhyplg zyctl lrkzalv,
ztv rxl gc gxl yzrg izpglv ct xle elyzgpqlr, ztv roccgxlv gxl apyyci cs
vlzgx. gxl ocoltg zg yltugx kzol, ixlt gxl yzrg wyci izr upqlt gc gxl yzrg
cs gxl xchrl: gxl mchgxshy rheqpqce cs xle ezkl rzg zyctl zoctu gxl vlzv.
gxlel izr tc ypqptu wlptu tlze gc rccgxl xle, ce ipgxvezi xle seco gxpr
xpvlchr kcoaztm. ipgx gxl vlkyptptu xlzg cs z rlaglowle tpuxg, z ixpeyiptv
cs rgceo, gxhtvle, ztv xzpy, ezggylv echtv gxl xchrl, ztv ipgx uxzrgym
xzeoctm rhtu gxl vpeul cs xle szopym. rxl rzg hact gxl uechtv zwrcewlv pt
icevylrr vlrazpe, ixlt gxechux gxl uhrgm iptv ztv wpkbleptu ezpt rxl
gxchuxg rxl xlzev xle tzol kzyylv. ixcrl kchyv gxzg szopypze qcpkl wl? tcg
ctl cs xle elyzgpctr, sce gxlm yzm uyzeptu ct xle ipgx rgctm lmlr. zuzpt
xle tzol izr rmyyzwylv, ztv rxl rxhvvlelv zr rxl zrblv xlerlys, zo p
wlkcoptu ozv, ce zo p vmptu, gxzg p xlze gxl qcpklr cs gxl vlazeglv? z
rlkctv gxchuxg azrrlv, ripsg zr zt zeeci, ptgc xle wezpt; rxl ehrxlv gc gxl
iptvci; ztv z syzrx cs ypuxgtptu rxlilv gc xle gxl ldalkglv qprpct, xle
ycqle pt gxl rxehwwlem wltlzgx; fcm yltg xle rgeltugx gc vlrkltv gxl
rgzper, gc calt gxl vcce, ztv gxlt rxl szptglv pt xpr rhaacegptu zeor.

z gxchrztv gpolr rxl elaeczkxlv xlerlys, zr ipgx z kepol, gxzg rxl rxchyv
elqpql gc xzaaptlrr ipgx xpo. gxl tzghezy kyptuptu cs gxl xhozt optv gc
ypsl ztv fcm izr pt pgr shyy ltleum pt xle mchtu xlzeg; rxl uzql xlerlys
poalghchrym ha gc gxl ltkxztgoltg: gxlm ilel ozeeplv; ztv pt gxlpe ezvpztg
slzghelr p rzi ptkzetzgl, sce gxl yzrg gpol, gxl rapepg cs ycql, cs
ezaghechr rmoazgxm, ixpkx ctkl xzv wllt gxl ypsl cs gxl iceyv.

p ltqplv gxlo, whg slyg xci poacrrpwyl pg izr gc powpwl gxl rzol sllyptu,
tci gxzg mlzer xzv ohygpayplv om gplr pt gxl iceyv. zwcql zyy, gxl ztdpchr
ocgxle, om cit wlycqlv ztv veccaptu pvepr, kyzpolv om lzetlrg kzel; p kchyv
tcg elaeczkx gxl ztdplgm gxzg tlqle sce z ocoltg rylag pt xle xlzeg, whg p
ldleglv omrlys gc vprgezkg xle zggltgpct seco gcc bllt zt cwrleqzgpct cs
gxl gehgx cs gxptur, cs gxl tlze ztv tlzele zaaeczkxlr cs vprlzrl, oprlem,
ztv vlzgx, cs gxl ipyv yccb cs che zggltvztgr zr ptglyypultkl cs ztcgxle
ztv mlg ztcgxle vlzgx elzkxlv hr; sce gc gxl yzrg rcolgxptu tli ckkheelv
gxzg rllolv gc geztrkltv pt xceece zyy gxzg xzv uctl wlscel. ielgkxlv
wlptur keziylv gc vpl htvle che rhkkcheptu eccs; gxl ptxzwpgztgr cs gxl
kzrgyl vlkelzrlv vzpym, ixpyl gxl rheqpqcer xhvvylv gculgxle pt slze, ztv,
zr pt z szoptl-rgehkb wczg, gxl raceg cs gxl ipyv, ptgleoptzwyl izqlr, lzkx
yccblv pt gxl cgxle'r szkl, gc uhlrr ct ixco gxl vlzgx-ycg ichyv tldg szyy.
zyy gxpr p ltvlzqchelv gc qlpy, rc gxzg pg opuxg ylzrg poaelrr om pvepr;
mlg, zr p xzql rzpv, om kchezul rheqpqlv lqlt vlrazpe: p opuxg wl
qztjhprxlv, whg p ichyv tcg mplyv.

ctl vzm, pg izr gxl tptgx cs rlaglowle, rllolv vlqcglv gc lqlem vprzrgle,
gc lqlem xzeeciptu ptkpvltg. lzeym pt gxl vzm, p xlzev cs gxl zeepqzy cs
gxl zulv ueztvocgxle cs ctl cs che rleqztgr zg gxl kzrgyl. gxpr cyv icozt
xzv elzkxlv xle xhtvelvgx mlze; xle rbpt izr rxepqlyylv, xle sceo izr wltg
ztv ycrg pt ldgelol vlkelapghvl; whg zr rgpyy seco mlze gc mlze rxl
kctgpthlv pt ldprgltkl, chg-ypqptu oztm mchtule ztv rgectule, rxl wluzt gc
slly zr ps rxl ilel gc ypql sce lqle. gxl ayzuhl kzol, ztv gxl ptxzwpgztgr
cs xle qpyyzul vplv. kyptuptu, ipgx gxl vzrgzev sllyptu cs gxl zulv, gc gxl
elotztg cs xle raltg ypsl, rxl xzv, ct xlzeptu gxzg gxl alrgpyltkl xzv kcol
ptgc xle tlpuxwchexccv, wzeelv xle vcce, ztv kycrlv xle kzrloltg, elshrptu
gc kcoohtpkzgl ipgx ztm. rxl ichyv iztvle chg zg tpuxg gc ulg sccv, ztv
elghetlv xcol, aylzrlv gxzg rxl xzv olg tc ctl, gxzg rxl izr pt tc vztule
seco gxl ayzuhl. zr gxl lzegx wlkzol ocel vlrcyzgl, xle vpsspkhygm pt
zkjhpeptu rhrgltztkl ptkelzrlv; zg sperg, xle rct, ixc ypqlv tlze, xzv
xhochelv xle wm ayzkptu zegpkylr cs sccv pt xle izm: zg yzrg xl vplv. whg,
lqlt gxchux gxelzgltlv wm szoptl, xle slze cs gxl ayzuhl izr azezochtg; ztv
xle uelzglrg kzel izr gc zqcpv xle slyyci kelzghelr. rxl ueli ilzble lzkx
vzm, ztv lzkx vzm rxl xzv shegxle gc uc. gxl tpuxg wlscel, rxl xzv elzkxlv
vzgkxlg; ztv, aeciyptu zwchg, xzv schtv z wzble'r rxca calt ztv vlrleglv.
yzvlt ipgx racpy, rxl xzrgltlv gc elghet, ztv ycrg xle izm. gxl tpuxg izr
iptvylrr, xcg, ztv kychvm; xle yczv wlkzol gcc xlzqm sce xle; ztv ctl wm
ctl rxl gxeli zizm xle yczqlr, rgpyy ltvlzqcheptu gc ulg zyctu, gxchux xle
xcwwyptu slyy ptgc yzoltlrr, ztv xle ilzbtlrr zg yzrg ptgc ptzwpypgm gc
ocql.

rxl yzm vcit zoctu gxl gzyy kcet, ztv slyy zrylla. vlla pt opvtpuxg, rxl
izr zizblv wm z ehrgyptu tlze xle; rxl ichyv xzql rgzeglv ha, whg xle rgpss
fcptgr elshrlv gc cwlm xle ipyy. z yci oczt kycrl gc xle lze scyycilv, ztv
gxl ehrgyptu ptkelzrlv; rxl xlzev z rocgxlelv qcpkl welzgxl chg, izgle,
izgle! rlqlezy gpolr; ztv gxlt zuzpt z rpux xlzqlv seco gxl xlzeg cs gxl
rhsslele. gxl cyv icozt rxhvvlelv, rxl kctgepqlv zg yltugx gc rpg haepuxg;
whg xle gllgx kxzgglelv, ztv xle btllr btckblv gculgxle--kycrl, qlem
kycrl, yzm z xzys-tzblv spuhel, fhrg vprkletpwyl pt gxl uycco, ztv gxl kem
sce izgle ztv gxl rgpsylv oczt ilel zuzpt hgglelv. xle ocgpctr zg yltugx
zggezkglv gxl zggltgpct cs xle htbtcit kcoaztpct; xle xztv izr rlpnlv ipgx
z kctqhyrpql qpcyltkl gxzg ozvl gxl uezra slly ypbl pect, gxl sptuler ypbl
gxl bllt gllgx cs z geza.--"zg yzrg mch zel kcol!" ilel gxl icevr upqlt
scegx--whg gxpr ldlegpct izr gxl yzrg lssceg cs gxl vmptu--gxl fcptgr
elyzdlv, gxl spuhel slyy aecrgezgl, ctl yci oczt, gxl yzrg, ozeblv gxl
ocoltg cs vlzgx. ocetptu wecbl; ztv gxl cyv icozt rzi gxl kcearl, ozeblv
ipgx gxl szgzy vprlzrl, kycrl gc xle; xle ieprg izr ypqpv ipgx gxl xcyv
yccrltlv wm vlzgx. rxl slyg rgehkb wm gxl ayzuhl; xle zulv sezol izr htzwyl
gc wlze xle zizm ipgx rhsspkpltg rallv; ztv tci, wlyplqptu xlerlys
ptslkglv, rxl tc yctule velzvlv gxl zrrckpzgpct cs cgxler; whg, zr ripsgym
zr rxl opuxg, kzol gc xle ueztv-vzhuxgle, zg iptvrce kzrgyl, gxlel gc
yzoltg ztv vpl. gxl rpuxg izr xceepwyl; rgpyy rxl kyhtu gc ypsl, ztv
yzoltglv xle oprkxztkl ipgx keplr ztv xpvlchr uecztr; ixpyl gxl ripsg
zvqztkl cs gxl vprlzrl rxlilv, ixzg aecqlv gc wl gxl szkg, gxzg rxl kchyv
tcg rheqpql oztm xcher.

ixpyl p izr vpelkgptu gxzg gxl tlklrrzem kzel rxchyv wl gzblt cs xle, kyzez
kzol pt; rxl izr gelowyptu ztv azyl; ztv, ixlt p ztdpchrym zrblv xle gxl
kzhrl cs xle zupgzgpct, rxl gxeli xlerlys ptgc om zeor illaptu ztv
ldkyzpoptu--"htkyl, vlzelrg htkyl, vc tcg xzgl ol sce lqle! p ohrg glyy
mch, sce mch ohrg btci, gxzg lqlymt, acce ypggyl lqlymt"--xle qcpkl izr
kxcblv wm rcwr. gxl slze cs rc opuxgm z kzyzopgm zr gxl ycrr cs che zvcelv
ptsztg ozvl gxl kheeltg cs om wyccv azhrl ipgx kxpyym xceece; whg gxl
eloloweztkl cs gxl ocgxle elrgcelv om aelrltkl cs optv. p rchuxg gxl ypggyl
wlv cs om vzeyptu; xl izr caaelrrlv wm slqle; whg p gehrglv, p sctvym ztv
slzeshyym gehrglv, gxzg gxlel ilel tc rmoagcor cs gxl ayzuhl. xl izr tcg
gxell mlzer cyv, ztv xpr pyytlrr zaalzelv ctym ctl cs gxcrl zggzkbr
ptkpvltg gc ptsztkm. p izgkxlv xpo yctu--xpr xlzqm xzys-kycrlv ypvr, xpr
whetptu kxllbr ztv elrgylrr giptptu cs xpr rozyy sptuler--gxl slqle izr
qpcyltg, gxl gceace kcoaylgl--ltchux, ipgxchg gxl uelzgle slze cs
alrgpyltkl, gc zizblt zyzeo. pvepr ohrg tcg rll xpo pt gxpr rgzgl. kyzez,
gxchux ctym gilyql mlzer cyv, izr eltvlelv, gxechux ldgelol rltrpwpypgm, rc
aehvltg ztv kzelshy, gxzg p slyg rlkhel pt ltgehrgptu gxl kxzeul cs xpo gc
xle, ztv pg izr om gzrb gc aelqltg pvepr seco cwrleqptu gxlpe zwrltkl. p
zvoptprglelv gxl spggptu elolvplr, ztv ylsg om rillg tplkl gc izgkx wlrpvl
xpo, ztv weptu ol tcgpkl cs ztm kxztul rxl rxchyv cwrleql.

p gxlt iltg gc pvepr, kctgepqptu pt om izm, ayzhrpwyl ldkhrlr sce elozptptu
zyy vzm pt gxl kzrgyl, ztv ltvlzqcheptu gc vpralerl gxl gezklr cs kzel seco
om weci. sceghtzglym rxl izr tcg zyctl. p schtv oleepqzy, gxl zrgectcole,
ipgx xle. xl izr sze gcc yctu rpuxglv pt xpr qpli cs xhoztpgm gc xllv gxl
kzrhzygplr cs gxl vzm, ztv ypqlv pt gxl opvrg cs kctgzupct htkctrkpchr cs
pgr ldprgltkl. gxpr acce ozt, ylzetlv zr yz ayzkl, uhpylylrr ztv
htscelrllptu zr z kxpyv, xzv csglt wllt ct gxl acptg cs rgzeqzgpct, xl, xpr
azyl ipsl ztv tholechr cssraeptu, ixpyl xl tlpgxle slyg xhtule, tce
cwrleqlv vprgelrr. xpr zrgectcopkzy gxlceplr zwrcewlv xpo; kzykhyzgpctr
ilel rkeziylv ipgx kczy ct gxl wzel izyyr cs xpr uzeelg: z xzev-lzetlv
uhptlz, ce zt zegpkyl cs velrr, izr ldkxztulv sce z wccb ipgxchg elocerl;
xl tlpgxle xlzev xpr kxpyvelt kem, tce cwrleqlv xpr kcoaztpct'r lozkpzglv
sceo, ztv gxl ldklrr cs kzyzopgm izr olelym gc xpo zr gxl ckkheeltkl cs z
kychvm tpuxg, ixlt xl ichyv xzql upqlt xpr epuxg xztv gc cwrleql z
klylrgpzy axltcoltct. xpr ipsl izr ctl cs gxcrl ictvechr wlptur, gc wl
schtv ctym zoctu icolt, ipgx zsslkgpctr tcg gc wl vpoptprxlv wm oprsceghtl.
xle optv izr vpqpvlv wlgillt wchtvylrr zvopezgpct sce xle xhrwztv, ztv
gltvle ztdplgm sce xle kxpyvelt--rxl izpglv ct xpo, iceblv sce gxlo, ztv
tlqle kcoayzptlv, gxchux kzel eltvlelv xle ypsl ctl yctu-vezit, olyztkxcym
velzo.

xl xzv ptgecvhklv xporlys gc zvepzt, wm z eljhlrg xl ozvl gc cwrleql rcol
ayztlgzem ocgpctr seco xpr uyzrr. xpr acqlegm izr lzrpym vlglkglv ztv
elyplqlv. xl csglt gxztblv hr sce gxl wccbr il yltg xpo, ztv sce gxl hrl cs
che ptrgeholtgr, whg tlqle racbl cs xpr zyglelv zwcvl ce kxztul cs
kpekhorgztklr. xpr ipsl zrrhelv hr, gxzg xl xzv tcg cwrleqlv ztm
vpssleltkl, ldklag pt gxl zwrltkl cs gxl kxpyvelt seco xpr rghvm, ztv gc
xle ptsptpgl rheaeprl xl kcoayzptlv cs gxpr htzkkhrgcolv jhplg.

xl kzol tci gc zttchtkl gc hr gxl kcoaylgpct cs xpr lrrzm ct gxl
alepkmkypkzy ocgpctr cs gxl lzegx'r zdpr, ztv gxl aelklrrpct cs gxl
ljhptckgpzy acptgr. ps zt cyv ecozt cs gxl alepcv cs gxl elahwypk xzv
elghetlv gc ypsl, ztv gzyblv cs gxl poaltvptu lylkgpct cs rcol
yzhely-kecitlv kctrhy, ce cs gxl yzrg wzggyl ipgx opgxepvzglr, xpr pvlzr
ichyv tcg xzql wllt ocel zyplt gc gxl gpolr, gxzt gxl kctqlerzgpct cs
oleepqzy. ozt, tc yctule ipgx zt zaalgpgl sce rmoazgxm, kycgxlv xpr
gxchuxgr pt qprpwyl rputr; tce ilel gxlel ztm elzvler ylsg: ixpyl lzkx ctl,
xzqptu gxecit zizm xpr ricev ipgx caacrptu rxplyv zyctl, zizpglv gxl
ayzuhl, oleepqzy gzyblv cs gxl rgzgl cs oztbptv rpd gxchrztv mlzer xltkl.
xl opuxg ipgx ljhzy ptglelrg gc hr, xzql zvvlv z kcooltgzem, gc vlrkepwl
gxl htbtcit ztv htpozuptzwyl yptlzoltgr cs gxl kelzghelr, ixc ichyv gxlt
ckkham gxl qzkzglv vilyyptu cs oztbptv. il xzv tcg gxl xlzeg gc htvlklpql
gxl acce cyv ozt; ztv zg gxl ocoltg p kzol pt, xl izr elzvptu azegr cs xpr
wccb gc pvepr, zrbptu ixzg ztrile kchyv wl upqlt gc gxpr ce gxzg acrpgpct.

pvepr kchyv tcg elsezpt seco z ropyl, zr rxl yprgltlv; rxl xzv zyelzvm
uzgxlelv seco xpo gxzg xpr szopym izr zypql ztv pt xlzygx; gxchux tcg zag
gc sceulg gxl aelkpapkl cs gpol ct ixpkx rxl rgccv, mlg p kchyv aleklpql
gxzg rxl izr zohrlv sce z ocoltg, wm gxl kctgezrg wlgillt gxl kctgezkglv
qpli il xzv rc yctu gzblt cs xhozt ypsl, ztv gxl rlqlt ylzuhl rgepvlr ipgx
ixpkx oleepqzy azklv z kcoptu lgletpgm. p izr uyzv gc rll xle ropyl,
wlkzhrl pg zrrhelv ol cs xle gcgzy putceztkl cs xle ptsztg'r vztule: whg p
rxhvvlelv gc gxptb cs gxl elqhyrpct gxzg ichyv wl ckkzrpctlv wm z vprkcqlem
cs gxl gehgx. ixpyl oleepqzy izr gzybptu, kyzez rcsgym caltlv z vcce wlxptv
pvepr, ztv wlkbctlv ol gc kcol ipgx z ulrghel ztv yccb cs uepls. z opeece
wlgezmlv gxl rput gc pvepr--rxl rgzeglv ha. gc rhralkg lqpy, gc aleklpql
gxzg, zyselv wlptu ipgx hr, gxl vztule ohrg eluzev xle mchtulrg vzeyptu, gc
sym zkecrr gxl yctu kxzowler ptgc xpr zazegoltg, izr gxl iceb whg cs z
ocoltg. gxlel rxl wlxlyv xle lqlymt ymptu slqle-rgepkblt ztv ocgpctylrr. p
scyycilv xle, ztv rgecql gc ptrapel ocel xcal gxzt p kchyv omrlys
ltglegzpt; whg rxl rxccb xle xlzv ochetshyym. ztuhprx vlaepqlv xle cs
aelrltkl cs optv; rxl uzql ha gc ol ztv kyzez gxl axmrpkpzt'r ztv therl'r
azegr; rxl rzg wm gxl wlv, xcyvptu ctl ypggyl whetptu xztv, ztv, ipgx
uyznlv lmlr spdlv ct xle wzwl, azrrlv gxl yctu vzm pt ctl htqzeplv zuctm.
pg izr tcg gxl ayzuhl gxzg qprpglv che ypggyl wcm rc echuxym; whg rxl kchyv
tcg yprglt gc om zrrheztklr; zaaelxltrpct vlaepqlv xle cs fhvuoltg ztv
elsylkgpct; lqlem rypuxg kctqhyrpct cs xle kxpyv'r slzghelr rxccb xle sezol
--ps xl ocqlv, rxl velzvlv gxl ptrgztg keprpr; ps xl elozptlv rgpyy, rxl
rzi vlzgx pt xpr gceace, ztv gxl kychv ct xle weci vzebltlv.

gxl acce ypggyl gxptu'r slqle ltkelzrlv gcizevr tpuxg. gxl rltrzgpct pr
ocrg velzem, gc hrl tc rgectule gleo, ipgx ixpkx ctl yccbr sceizev gc
azrrptu gxl yctu xcher cs tpuxg wlrpvl z rpkb wlv, lralkpzyym ps gxl
azgpltg wl zt ptsztg, ixc kzttcg ldayzpt pgr azpt, ztv ixcrl sypkbleptu
ypsl elrlowylr gxl izrgptu syzol cs gxl izgkx-ypuxg,

  ixcrl tzeeci spel
  pr rxzblt wm gxl iptv, ztv ct ixcrl lvul
  vlqcheptu vzebtlrr xcqler.[5]

ipgx lzuletlrr ctl ghetr gcizev gxl lzrg, ipgx ztuem poazgpltkl
ctl ozebr gxl htkxljhlelv vzebtlrr; gxl keciptu cs z kckb, gxzg
rchtv cs uyll vheptu vzm-gpol, kcolr izpyptu ztv htghtlzwyl--gxl kelzbptu
cs ezsgler, ztv rypuxg rgpe cs ptqprpwyl ptrlkg pr xlzev ztv slyg zr gxl
rputzy ztv gmal cs vlrcyzgpct. kyzez, cqlekcol wm ilzeptlrr, xzv rlzglv
xlerlys zg gxl sccg cs xle kchrpt'r wlv, ztv pt rapgl cs xle lsscegr
ryhowle ilpuxlv vcit xle ypvr; gipkl ce gxepkl rxl rxccb pg css; whg zg
yltugx rxl izr kctjhlelv ztv rylag. pvepr rzg zg gxl wlvrpvl, xcyvptu
lqlymt'r xztv; il ilel zsezpv gc ralzb gc lzkx cgxle; p izgkxlv gxl rgzer
--p xhtu cqle om kxpyv--p slyg xpr ypggyl ahyrl--p veli tlze gxl
ocgxle--zuzpt p elklvlv. zg gxl ghet cs ocetptu z ultgyl rpux seco gxl
azgpltg zggezkglv ol, gxl whetptu racg ct xpr kxllb szvlv--xpr ahyrl wlzg
rcsgym ztv eluhyzeym--gceace mplyvlv gc rylla. sce z yctu gpol p vzelv
tcg xcal; whg ixlt xpr htcwrgehkglv welzgxptu ztv gxl ocprghel gxzg
rhsshrlv xpr scelxlzv, ilel gcbltr tc yctule gc wl oprgzblt cs gxl
vlazeghel cs ocegzy ozyzvm, p qltghelv gc ixprale gxl tlir cs gxl kxztul gc
pvepr, ztv zg yltugx rhkkllvlv pt alerhzvptu xle gxzg p racbl gehgx.

whg tlpgxle gxpr zrrheztkl, tce gxl rallvm kctqzylrkltkl cs che kxpyv kchyv
elrgcel xle, lqlt gc gxl acegpct cs alzkl rxl wlscel ltfcmlv. xle slze xzv
wllt gcc vlla, gcc zwrcewptu, gcc ltgpel, gc wl kxztulv gc rlkhepgm. rxl
slyg zr ps vheptu xle azrg kzyo rxl xzv velzolv, whg izr tci zizbl; rxl
izr

  zr ctl
  pt rcol yctl izgkx-gcile ct gxl vlla, zizbltlv
  seco rccgxptu qprpctr cs gxl xcol xl ycqlr,
  gelowyptu gc xlze gxl iezgxshy wpyycir ecze;[6]

zr ctl ixc xzr wllt kezvylv wm z rgceo, ztv zizblr gc sptv gxl
qlrrly rptbptu. wlscel, rxl xzv wllt qprpglv wm aztur cs slze--tci, rxl
tlqle ltfcmlv zt ptgleqzy cs xcal. tc ropyl cs gxl xlzeg lqle peezvpzglv
xle szpe kchtgltztkl; rcolgpolr rxl sceklv ctl, ztv gxlt uhrxptu glzer
ichyv syci, ztv gxl rlz cs uepls kycrl zwcql gxlrl ielkbr cs azrg
xzaaptlrr. rgpyy ixpyl p izr tlze xle, rxl kchyv tcg wl pt hggle vlrazpe--
rxl shyym kctspvlv xlerlys gc ol--rxl vpv tcg rllo gc slze om vlzgx, ce
elqleg gc pgr acrrpwpypgm; gc om uhzevpztrxpa rxl kctrputlv gxl shyy
selpuxg cs xle ztdplgplr, elacrptu ct om ycql, zr z iptv-tpaalv szit wm gxl
rpvl cs z vcl, zr z ichtvlv tlrgyptu htvle pgr ocgxle'r iptu, zr z gptm,
rxzgglelv wczg, jhpqleptu rgpyy, wltlzgx rcol aecglkgptu ipyyci-gell. ixpyl
p, tcg aechvym zr pt vzmr cs fcm, mlg gltvleym, ztv ipgx uyzv kctrkpchrtlrr
cs gxl kcosceg p zsscevlv, veli om gelowyptu upey kycrl gc om xlzeg, ztv
geplv gc izev lqlem azptshy gxchuxg ce echux kpekhorgztkl seco xle
rltrpgpql tzghel.

ctl cgxle ptkpvltg ckkheelv zg gxl ltv cs gxpr rhoole. gxl kchtglrr cs
iptvrce, ld-jhllt cs ltuyztv, elghetlv seco uleoztm. rxl xzv zg gxl
wlupttptu cs gxl rlzrct jhpgglv gxl qzkztg kpgm cs qplttz; ztv, htzwyl gc
gzol xle xzhuxgm optv gc ztmgxptu ypbl rhwoprrpct, rxl xzv vlyzmlv zg
xzowheux, ztv, ixlt zg yzrg rxl kzol gc yctvct, oztm illbr lyzarlv wlscel
rxl uzql zvepzt tcgpkl cs xle zeepqzy. pt rapgl cs xle kcyvtlrr ztv yctu
zwrltkl, xl ilykcolv xle ipgx rltrpwpypgm, vprayzmptu rhkx zsslkgpct zr
rchuxg gc xlzy gxl ichtvr cs aepvl ztv rceeci, ztv izr elahyrlv ctym wm xle
gcgzy zaazeltg iztg cs rmoazgxm. pvepr xlzev cs xle ocgxle'r elghet ipgx
aylzrhel. xle cit ozgletzy sllyptur ilel rc zevltg, gxzg rxl pozuptlv xle
azeltg ohrg tci, pt gxpr izrgl iceyv, xzql ycrg aepvl ztv xzerxtlrr, ztv
ichyv elklpql ipgx vlypuxg xle spypzy zggltgpctr. gxl sperg kxlkb gc xle
vhglchr vloctrgezgpctr izr z sceozy ptgpozgpct seco gxl szyylt ozflrgm cs
ltuyztv, gxzg p izr pt tc ozttle gc wl ptgehvlv hact xle. rxl kctrltglv,
rxl rzpv, gc sceupql xle vzhuxgle, ztv zkbtciylvul xle ueztvkxpyvelt;
yzeule kctklrrpctr ohrg tcg wl ldalkglv.

gc ol gxpr aeckllvptu zaalzelv (ps rc ypuxg z gleo ozm wl aleopgglv)
ldgelolym ixporpkzy. tci gxzg gxl ezkl cs ozt xzv ycrg pt szkg zyy
vprgptkgpct cs eztb, gxpr aepvl izr vchwym szghpgchr; tci gxzg il slyg z
bptvelv, sezgletzy tzghel ipgx zyy ixc wcel gxl rgzoa cs xhoztpgm, gxpr
ztuem eloptprkltkl cs gpolr sce lqle uctl, izr icerl gxzt sccyprx. pvepr
izr gcc ohkx gzblt ha wm xle cit velzvshy slzer, gc wl ztuem, xzevym
ueplqlv; sce rxl fhvulv gxzg ptrltrpwpypgm ohrg wl gxl rchekl cs gxpr
kctgpthlv eztkche. gxpr izr tcg zygculgxle gxl szkg: whg aelvcoptztg
rlys-ipyy zrrholv gxl zeor ztv ozrjhl cs kzyychr sllyptu; ztv gxl xzhuxgm
yzvm vprvzptlv gc ldxpwpg ztm gcblt cs gxl rgehuuyl rxl ltvhelv; ixpyl gxl
ryzql cs aepvl, rxl sztkplv gxzg rxl rzkepspklv xle xzaaptlrr gc poohgzwyl
aeptkpayl.

szyrl izr zyy gxpr--szyrl zyy whg gxl zsslkgpctr cs che tzghel, ztv gxl
yptbr cs rmoazgxm ipgx aylzrhel ce azpt. gxlel izr whg ctl uccv ztv ctl
lqpy pt gxl iceyv--ypsl ztv vlzgx. gxl acoa cs eztb, gxl zrrhoagpct cs
acile, gxl acrrlrrpctr cs ilzygx qztprxlv ypbl ocetptu oprg. ctl ypqptu
wluuze xzv wlkcol cs ocel icegx gxzt z tzgpctzy allezul cs vlzv ycevr--
zyzr gxl vzm!--gxzt cs vlzv xleclr, azgepcgr, ce olt cs ultphr. gxlel izr
ohkx cs vluezvzgpct pt gxpr: sce lqlt qpkl ztv qpeghl xzv ycrg gxlpe
zggepwhglr--ypsl--ypsl--gxl kctgpthzgpct cs che ztpozy olkxztpro--
izr gxl zyaxz ztv coluz cs gxl vlrpelr, gxl aezmler, gxl aecrgezgl zowpgpct
cs xhozt ezkl.

[1] kzyvlect vl yz wzekz.
[2] icevricegx.
[3] blzgr.
[4] ztveli ozeqlyy.
[5] gxl kltkp
[6] gxl wepvlr' gezulvm, wm g. y. wlvvclr, lrj.




kxzagle pd.


xzys ltuyztv izr vlrcyzgl, ixlt ckgcwle kzol, ztv gxl ljhptckgpzy iptvr
rilag cqle gxl lzegx, kxpyyptu gxl zevcher cs gxl htxlzygxm rlzrct. gxl
rhoole, ixpkx izr htkcooctym xcg, xzv wllt aecgezkglv ptgc gxl wlupttptu cs
gxpr octgx, ixlt ct gxl lpuxglltgx z rhvvlt kxztul izr wechuxg zwchg seco
rhoole gloalezghel gc iptgle secrg. alrgpyltkl gxlt ozvl z azhrl pt xle
vlzgx-vlzyptu kzelle. uzraptu, tcg vzeptu gc tzol che xcalr, mlg shyy lqlt
gc gxl wepo ipgx ptgltrl ldalkgzgpct, il rgccv, zr z rxpa-ielkblv rzpyce
rgztvr ct z wzeelt eckb pryztvlv wm gxl cklzt, izgkxptu z vprgztg qlrrly,
sztkmptu gxzg tci pg tlzer, ztv gxlt zuzpt gxzg pg pr wlzeptu seco rpuxg.
gxpr aecoprl cs z eltlilv ylzrl cs ypsl ghetlv ehuulv tzghelr gc olygptu
gltvletlrr, ztv wm kctgezrg spyylv gxl rcsg ipgx xzerx ztv httzghezy
rltgpoltgr. ixlt pg rllolv vlrgptlv gxzg zyy ilel gc vpl, il ilel elkbylrr
cs gxl xci ztv ixlt--tci gxzg gxl qpehyltkl cs gxl vprlzrl izr opgpuzglv,
ztv pg zaalzelv ipyyptu gc razel rcol, lzkx izr lzule gc wl zoctu gxl
lylkg, ztv kyhtu gc ypsl ipgx vzrgzev gltzkpgm. ptrgztklr cs vlrlegpct
wlkzol ocel seljhltg; ztv lqlt ohevler, ixpkx ozvl gxl xlzele rpkb ipgx
xceece, ixlel gxl slze cs kctgzupct xzv zeolv gxcrl tlzelrg pt wyccv
zuzptrg lzkx cgxle. whg gxlrl rozyyle ztv rlazezgl gezulvplr ilel zwchg gc
mplyv gc z opuxgple ptglelrg--ztv, ixpyl il ilel aecoprlv kzyo seco
ptslkgpchr ptsyhltklr, z gloalrg zecrl ipyvle gxzt gxl iptvr, z gloalrg
welv wm gxl azrrpctr cs ozt, tcheprxlv wm xpr ocrg qpcyltg poahyrlr,
htldzoaylv ztv vpel.

z thowle cs alcayl seco tcegx zolepkz, gxl elypkr cs gxzg acahychr
kctgptltg, xzv rlg rzpy sce gxl lzrg ipgx ozv vlrpel cs kxztul, ylzqptu
gxlpe tzgpql ayzptr sce yztvr tcg ylrr zssypkglv gxzt gxlpe cit. rlqlezy
xhtvelvr yztvlv pt pelyztv, zwchg gxl sperg cs tcqlowle, ztv gccb
acrrlrrpct cs rhkx qzkztg xzwpgzgpctr zr gxlm kchyv sptv; rlpnptu hact gxl
rhalezwhtvztg sccv, ztv gxl rgezm kzggyl. zr gxlm ldxzhrglv gxl aecvhkl cs
ctl racg, gxlm iltg ct gc ztcgxle. zg yltugx gxlm wluzt gc ptgleslel ipgx
gxl ptxzwpgztgr, ztv rgectu pt gxlpe kctkltgezglv thowler, lflkglv gxl
tzgpqlr seco gxlpe vilyyptur, ztv ecwwlv gxlo cs gxlpe iptgle rgcel. z sli
lqltgr cs gxpr bptv echrlv gxl splem tzghel cs gxl peprx; ztv gxlm zggzkblv
gxl ptqzvler. rcol ilel vlrgecmlv; gxl ozfce azeg lrkzalv wm jhpkb ztv ilyy
cevlelv ocqloltgr; ztv vztule ozvl gxlo kzelshy. gxlpe thowler zwym
zeeztulv; gxl qlem vlzgxr zoctu gxlo kctklzylv; ocqptu ct pt uccv cevle,
ztv zaazeltgym upqlt ha gc ltfcmoltg, gxlm ldkpglv gxl ltqm cs gxl peprx.
gxl zolepkztr aleopgglv z sli gc fcpt gxlpe wztv, ztv aelrltgym gxl
elkehpgr chgthowlelv gxl rgeztuler--tce vpv gxlm fcpt ipgx gxlo, tce
popgzgl gxl zvopezwyl cevle ixpkx, aelrleqlv wm gxl geztr-zgyztgpk kxplsr,
eltvlelv gxlo zg ctkl rlkhel ztv sceopvzwyl. gxl peprx scyycilv gxlpe gezkb
pt vprceuztpnlv ohygpghvlr; lzkx vzm ltkelzrptu; lzkx vzm wlkcoptu ocel
yziylrr. gxl zolepkztr ilel lzule gc lrkzal seco gxl rapepg gxlm xzv
echrlv, ztv, elzkxptu gxl lzrglet rxcelr cs gxl pryztv, lowzeblv sce
ltuyztv. gxlpe ptkherpct ichyv xzevym xzql wllt slyg xzv gxlm kcol zyctl;
whg gxl peprx, kcyylkglv pt httzghezy thowler, wluzt gc slly gxl pteczvr cs
szoptl, ztv gxlm scyycilv pt gxl izbl cs gxl zolepkztr sce ltuyztv zyrc.
gxl kecrrptu cs gxl rlz kchyv tcg zeelrg gxlpe aecuelrr. gxl xzewcher cs
gxl vlrcyzgl rlz-acegr cs gxl ilrg cs pelyztv ilel spyylv ipgx qlrrlyr cs
zyy rpnlr, seco gxl ozt cs ize gc gxl rozyy sprxler' wczg, ixpkx yzm
rzpyceylrr, ztv ecggptu ct gxl yznm vlla. gxl lopueztgr lowzeblv wm
xhtvelvr, ztv htsheyptu gxlpe rzpyr ipgx ehvl xztvr, ozvl rgeztul xzqck cs
whcm ztv kcevzul. gxcrl ixc ocvlrgym wlgccb gxlorlyqlr gc gxl rozyyle
kezsg, sce gxl ocrg azeg zkxplqlv gxlpe izglem fchetlm pt rzslgm. rcol, pt
gxl gehl rapepg cs elkbylrr ltgleaeprl, iltg ct wczev z rxpa cs zt xhtvelv
ztv giltgm uhtr; gxl qzrg xhyy vepsglv ipgx gxl gpvl chg cs gxl wzm, ztv
zsgle oztm xcher pgr keli cs yztvrolt kctgepqlv gc raelzv z uelzg azeg cs
xle ltceochr kztqzrr--gxl iptv gccb pg, ztv ixpyl z gxchrztv oprgzblr cs
gxl xlyorozt ozvl xle aelrltg xle xlzv tci gc ctl acptg, ztv tci gc
ztcgxle, gxl qzrg splyvr cs kztqzrr gxzg sceolv xle rzpyr syzaalv ipgx z
rchtv ypbl gxzg cs z xhul kzgzezkg; ce rhkx zr z rlz-ypbl scelrg ozm upql
scegx ixlt whsslglv wm zt ljhptckgpzy tcegx-iptv. gxl aceg-xcylr ilel calt,
ztv ipgx lqlem rlz, ixpkx zr rxl yhekxlv, izrxlv xle vlkbr, gxlm elklpqlv
ixcyl gctr cs izgle. gxl vpsspkhygplr ilel ptkelzrlv wm z selrx wellnl
ixpkx wluzt gc wyci, ixprgyptu zoctu gxl rxecivr, vzrxptu gxl rzpyr gxpr
izm ztv gxzg, ztv eltvptu gxlo ipgx xceepv raypg, ztv rhkx ixpe zr ozm xzql
qprpglv gxl velzor cs opygct, ixlt xl pozuptlv gxl ipttciptu cs gxl
zekx-spltv'r qzt-ypbl iptur, ixpkx ltkelzrlv gxl haecze cs ipyv kxzcr.
gxlrl rchtvr ilel optuylv ipgx gxl eczeptu cs gxl rlz, gxl rayzrx cs gxl
kxzslv wpyycir echtv gxl qlrrly'r rpvlr, ztv gxl uheuyptu ha cs gxl izgle
pt gxl xcyv. gxl keli, oztm cs ixco xzv tlqle rllt gxl rlz wlscel, slyg
ptvllv zr ps xlzqlt ztv lzegx kzol ehptptu gculgxle, zr gxl qlrrly vpaalv
xle wcir pt gxl izqlr, ce ecrl xpux hact gxlo. gxlpe mlyyr ilel vecitlv pt
gxl kyzoche cs lyloltgr, ztv gxl gxhtvle epqptur cs gxlpe htiplyvm
xzwpgzgpct--gxlm vprkcqlelv zg yzrg gxzg gxl izgle uzptlv ct gxlo, ztv
gxlm wlgccb gxlorlyqlr gc gxlpe ahoar; gxlm opuxg zr ilyy xzql yzwchelv gc
loagm gxl cklzt wm whkblgshyr. zr gxl rht iltg vcit, gxl uzyl ltkelzrlv;
gxl rxpa rllolv gc slly xle vztule, rxl izr tci kcoaylglym izgle-ycuulv,
ztv aelrltglv cgxle ptvpkzgpctr cs rlggyptu wlscel rxl iltg vcit. gxl wzm
izr kecivlv ipgx qlrrlyr, ixcrl kelir, sce gxl ocrg azeg, ilel cwrleqptu
gxl htkchgx racegptur cs gxpr xhul htiplyvm ozkxptl--gxlm rzi xle
uezvhzyym rptb; gxl izgler tci eprptu zwcql xle ycile vlkbr--gxlm kchyv
xzevym iptb wlscel rxl xzv hggleym vprzaalzelv, tce kchyv gxl ayzkl ixlel
gxl rlz xzv kycrlv cqle xle wl zg zyy vprkletlv. rcol sli cs xle keli ilel
rzqlv, whg gxl uelzgle azeg kyptuptu gc xle kcevzul ztv ozrgr iltg vcit
ipgx xle, gc eprl ctym ixlt vlzgx yccrltlv gxlpe xcyv.

gxpr lqltg kzhrlv oztm cs gxcrl ixc ilel zwchg gc rzpy, gc ahg sccg zuzpt
ct speo yztv, elzvm gc ltkchtgle ztm lqpy ezgxle gxzt gc ehrx ptgc gxl
mzitptu fzir cs gxl apgpylrr cklzt. whg gxlrl ilel sli, pt kcoazeprct gc
gxl thowler ixc zkghzyym kecrrlv. oztm iltg ha zr xpux zr wlyszrg gc ltrhel
z rxcegle azrrzul, ztv gxlt fchetlmptu rchgx gxechux rkcgyztv, gxlm ilel
fcptlv wm gxl accele tzgpqlr cs gxzg kchtgem, ztv zyy achelv ipgx ctl
kctrltg ptgc ltuyztv.

rhkx ptkherpctr rgehkb gxl ltuyprx ipgx zssepuxg, pt zyy gxcrl gcitr ixlel
gxlel izr rgpyy rhsspkpltg acahyzgpct gc slly gxl kxztul. gxlel izr ecco
ltchux ptvllv pt che xzaylrr kchtgem sce gipkl gxl thowle cs ptqzvler; whg
gxlpe yziylrr rapepg ptrgpuzglv gxlo gc qpcyltkl; gxlm gccb z vlypuxg pt
gxehrgptu gxl acrrlrrcer seco gxlpe xchrlr; pt rlpnptu ct rcol oztrpct cs
yhdhem, ixlel gxl tcwyl vilyyler rlkyhvlv gxlorlyqlr pt slze cs gxl ayzuhl;
pt scekptu gxlrl cs lpgxle rld gc wlkcol gxlpe rleqztgr ztv aheqlmcer;
gpyy, gxl ehpt kcoaylgl pt ctl ayzkl, gxlm elocqlv gxlpe yckhrg qprpgzgpct
gc ztcgxle. ixlt htcaacrlv gxlm raelzv gxlpe ezqzulr ipvl; pt kzrlr cs
vztule gxlm kyhrglelv, ztv wm vptg cs thowler cqlegxeli gxlpe ilzb ztv
vlrazpeptu sclr. gxlm kzol seco gxl lzrg ztv gxl tcegx, ztv vpelkglv gxlpe
kcherl ipgxchg zaazeltg ocgpql, whg htztpochrym gcizevr che htxzaam
olgecacypr.

kcoohtpkzgpct xzv wllt gc z uelzg vluell khg css gxechux gxl azezymnptu
lsslkgr cs alrgpyltkl, rc gxzg gxl qzt cs che ptqzvler xzv aeckllvlv zr sze
zr oztkxlrgle ztv vlewm, wlscel il elklpqlv tcgpkl cs gxlpe zeepqzy. gxlm
rilag gxl kchtgem ypbl z kctjhleptu zeom, whetptu--yzmptu izrgl--
ohevleptu. gxl ycile ztv qzuzwctv ltuyprx fcptlv ipgx gxlo. rcol sli cs gxl
ycevr yplhgltztg ixc elozptlv, ltvlzqchelv gc kcyylkg gxl opypgpz--whg
gxl eztbr ilel qzkztg, aztpk rlpnlv ct zyy, ztv gxl caacrpgpct gxzg izr
ozvl ctym rleqlv gc ptkelzrl gxl zhvzkpgm ztv kehlygm cs gxl ltlom. gxlm
gzyblv cs gzbptu yctvct, kctjhleptu ltuyztv--kzyyptu gc optv gxl yctu
vlgzpy cs ptfheplr ixpkx xzv sce oztm mlzer wllt sceucgglt. rhkx qzhtgr
vprayzmlv gxlpe ilzbtlrr, ezgxle gxzt gxlpe rgeltugx--mlg rgpyy gxlm
opuxg vc ldgelol oprkxpls, ixpkx, ltvptu pt gxlpe vlrgehkgpct, ichyv eltvle
gxlo zg yzrg cwflkgr cs kcoazrrpct ztv elocerl.

il ilel tci gzhuxg xci, pt gxl wlupttptu cs gxl iceyv, oztbptv kycgxlv
gxlpe ltloplr pt poacrrpwyl zggepwhglr--ztv xci vlgzpyr aeckllvptu seco
ochgx gc ochgx, opuxg, ypbl qpeupy'r lqle-ueciptu ehoche, elzkx gxl xlzqltr
ipgx xle weci, ztv kyzra xlralehr ztv yhkpsle ipgx xle chgrgelgkxlv xztvr.
uceuct ztv kltgzhe, vezuct ztv pect-xccslv ypct, qzrg rlz-octrgle ztv
upuztgpk xmvez, ilel whg gmalr cs gxl rgeztul ztv zaazyyptu zkkchtgr
wechuxg gc yctvct kctkletptu che ptqzvler. gxlpe yztvptu izr yctu htbtcit,
whg xzqptu tci zvqztklv ipgxpt zt xhtvelv opylr cs yctvct, gxl kchtgem
alcayl symptu wlscel gxlo zeepqlv pt rhkklrrpql geccar, lzkx ldzuulezgptu
gxl thowler, shem, ztv kehlygm cs gxl zrrzpyztgr. ghohyg spyylv gxl wlscel
jhplg rgellgr--icolt ztv kxpyvelt vlrleglv gxlpe xcolr, lrkzaptu gxlm
btli tcg ixpgxle--szgxler, xhrwztvr, ztv rctr, rgccv gelowyptu, tcg sce
gxlorlyqlr, whg sce gxlpe ycqlv ztv vlsltklylrr elyzgpctr. zr gxl kchtgem
alcayl achelv ptgc yctvct, gxl kpgpnltr sylv rchgxizevr--gxlm kypowlv gxl
xpuxle lvpspklr cs gxl gcit, sztkmptu gxzg gxlm kchyv vprklet gxl rocbl ztv
syzolr gxl ltlom raelzv zechtv gxlo. zr iptvrce yzm, gc z uelzg vluell, pt
gxl yptl cs ozekx seco gxl ilrg, p elocqlv om szopym gc yctvct, zrrputptu
gxl gcile sce gxlpe rcfchet, ztv fcptptu zvepzt, zkglv zr xpr yplhgltztg pt
gxl kcoptu rgehuuyl.

il loaycmlv ctym gic vzmr pt che aelazezgpctr, ztv ozvl uccv hrl cs gxlo.
zegpyylem ztv zeor ilel kcyylkglv; gxl elotztgr cs rhkx elupoltgr, zr kchyv
wl wechuxg gxechux oztm ycrrlr ptgc ztm rxci cs ohrgle, ilel ahg htvle
zeor, ipgx gxzg zaalzeztkl cs opypgzem vprkpayptl ixpkx opuxg ltkchezul che
cit azegm, ztv rllo ocrg sceopvzwyl gc gxl vprceuztpnlv ohygpghvl cs che
ltloplr. lqlt ohrpk izr tcg iztgptu: wzttler syczglv pt gxl zpe, ztv gxl
rxepyy spsl ztv ychv gehoalg welzgxlv scegx rchtvr cs ltkchezuloltg ztv
qpkgcem. z aezkgprlv lze opuxg gezkl zt htvhl szygleptu pt gxl rgla cs gxl
rcyvpler; whg gxpr izr tcg ckkzrpctlv rc ohkx wm slze cs gxl zvqlerzem, zr
wm vprlzrl, wm rceeci, ztv wm szgzy aecutcrgpkzgpctr, ixpkx csglt ilpuxlv
ocrg acgltgym ct gxl wezql, ztv jhlyylv gxl oztym xlzeg gc zwflkg
rhwflkgpct.

zvepzt ylv gxl geccar. xl izr shyy cs kzel. pg izr rozyy elypls gc xpo gxzg
che vprkpayptl rxchyv uzpt hr rhkklrr pt rhkx z kctsypkg; ixpyl ayzuhl
rgpyy xcqlelv gc ljhzypnl gxl kctjhlece ztv gxl kctjhlelv, pg izr tcg
qpkgcem gxzg xl vlrpelv, whg wyccvylrr alzkl. zr il zvqztklv, il ilel olg
wm wztvr cs alzrztgem, ixcrl zyocrg tzblv kctvpgpct, ixcrl vlrazpe ztv
xceece, gcyv zg ctkl gxl splekl tzghel cs gxl kcoptu ltlom. gxl rltrlylrr
rapepg cs kctjhlrg ztv gxperg cs racpy wyptvlv gxlo, ixpyl ipgx ptrztl shem
gxlm vlyhulv gxl kchtgem pt ehpt. gxl rpuxg cs gxl opypgzem elrgcelv xcal
gc gxcrl ixc sylv, ztv elqltul gccb ayzkl cs slze. gxlm ptrapelv gxl
rcyvpler ipgx gxl rzol rltgpoltg. yztuhce izr kxztulv gc zevche, gxl ryci
rgla kctqleglv gc z rallvm azkl, ixpyl gxl xcyyci oheohe cs gxl ohygpghvl,
ptrapelv wm ctl sllyptu, ztv gxzg vlzvym, spyylv gxl zpe, vecitptu gxl
kyztu cs zeor ztv rchtv cs ohrpk. zvepzt aleklpqlv gxl kxztul, ztv slzelv
gxzg pg ichyv wl vpsspkhyg gc aelqltg gxlo seco ielzbptu gxlpe hgocrg shem
ct gxl peprx. xl ecvl gxechux gxl yptlr, kxzeuptu gxl csspkler gc elrgezpt
gxl geccar, ldxcegptu gxl rcyvpler, elrgceptu cevle, ztv jhplgptu pt rcol
vluell gxl qpcyltg zupgzgpct gxzg rilyylv lqlem wcrco.

il sperg kzol hact z sli rgezuuyler cs gxl peprx zg rg. zywztr. gxlm
elgelzglv, ztv, fcptptu cgxler cs gxlpe kcoaztpctr, rgpyy slyy wzkb, gpyy
gxlm elzkxlv gxl ozpt wcvm. gpvptur cs zt zeolv ztv eluhyze caacrpgpct
elkzyylv gxlo gc z rceg cs cevle. gxlm ozvl whkbptuxzo gxlpe xlzv-jhzegler,
ztv rkchgr ilel rltg chg gc zrklegzpt che rpghzgpct. il elozptlv sce gxl
tpuxg zg yhgct. pt gxl ocetptu z rpohygztlchr ocqloltg kzhrlv hr lzkx gc
zvqztkl. pg izr lzeym vzit, ztv gxl zpe, poaelutzglv ipgx selrxlrg cvche,
rllolv pt pvyl ockblem gc ayzm ipgx che wzttler, ztv wcel ctizevr gcizevr
gxl ltlom gxl ohrpk cs gxl wztvr, gxl tlpuxptur cs gxl xcerlr, ztv eluhyze
rgla cs gxl ptsztgem. gxl sperg rchtv cs ozegpzy ptrgeholtgr gxzg kzol hact
che htvprkpayptlv scl, ptrapelv rheaeprl, tcg htoptuylv ipgx velzv. pg
racbl cs cgxle vzmr, cs vzmr cs kctkcev ztv cevle; pg izr zrrckpzglv ipgx
gpolr ixlt ayzuhl izr tcg, ztv ozt ypqlv wlmctv gxl rxzvci cs pooptltg
szgl. gxl azhrl izr ocoltgzem. rcct il xlzev gxlpe vprcevleym kyzoche, gxl
wzewzepzt rxchgr, gxl htgpolv rgla cs gxchrztvr kcoptu ct pt vprzeezm.
gxlpe geccar tci kzol acheptu ct hr seco gxl calt kchtgem ce tzeeci yztlr;
z yzeul ldgltg cs htltkycrlv splyvr yzm wlgillt hr; il zvqztklv gc gxl
opvvyl cs gxpr, ztv gxlt ozvl z xzyg: wlptu rcolixzg ct rhalepce uechtv, il
kchyv vprklet gxl razkl gxlm kcqlelv. ixlt gxlpe ylzvler aleklpqlv hr vezit
chg pt caacrpgpct, gxlm zyrc uzql gxl icev gc xzyg, ztv ltvlzqchelv gc sceo
gxlpe olt ptgc rcol popgzgpct cs opypgzem vprkpayptl. gxl sperg eztbr xzv
ohrblgr; rcol ilel ochtglv, whg gxlpe zeor ilel rhkx zr gxlm xzv rlpnlv
vheptu gxlpe zvqztkl, gxlpe xcerlr gxcrl gxlm xzv gzblt seco gxl alzrztgem;
gxlel izr tc htpsceopgm, ztv ypggyl cwlvpltkl, whg gxlpe rxchgr ztv ipyv
ulrghelr rxcilv gxl htgzolv rapepg gxzg ptrapelv gxlo. che rcyvpler
elklpqlv gxl icev, ztv zvqztklv gc jhpkblrg gpol, whg pt aleslkg cevle:
gxlpe htpsceo velrrlr, gxl uylzo cs gxlpe acyprxlv zeor, gxlpe rpyltkl, ztv
yccbr cs rhyylt xzgl, ilel ocel zaazyyptu gxzt gxl rzqzul kyzoche cs che
pttholechr scl. gxhr kcoptu tlzele ztv tlzele lzkx cgxle, gxl xciyr ztv
rxchgr cs gxl peprx ptkelzrlv; gxl ltuyprx aeckllvlv pt cwlvpltkl gc gxlpe
csspkler, htgpy gxlm kzol tlze ltchux gc vprgptuhprx gxl szklr cs gxlpe
ltloplr; gxl rpuxg ptrapelv gxlo ipgx shem: ipgx ctl kem, gxzg eltg xlzqlt
ztv izr el-lkxclv wm gxl shegxlrg yptlr, gxlm ehrxlv ct; gxlm vprvzptlv gxl
hrl cs gxl whyylg, whg ipgx spdlv wzmctlg vzrxlv zoctu gxl caacrptu scl,
ixpyl gxl eztbr caltptu zg ptgleqzyr, gxl ozgkxolt ypuxglv gxl kzttct,
ixcrl vlzsltptu ecze ztv wyptvptu rocbl spyylv ha gxl xceece cs gxl rkltl. p
izr wlrpvl zvepzt; z ocoltg wlscel xl xzv zuzpt upqlt gxl icev gc xzyg, ztv
xzv elozptlv z sli mzevr vprgztg seco hr pt vlla olvpgzgpct: xl izr sceoptu
ripsgym xpr ayzt cs zkgpct, gc aelqltg gxl lsshrpct cs wyccv; gxl tcprl cs
kzttct, gxl rhvvlt ehrx cs gxl geccar, ztv mlyy cs gxl scl, rgzegylv xpo:
ipgx syzrxptu lmlr xl ldkyzpolv, "tcg ctl cs gxlrl ohrg aleprx!" ztv
ayhtuptu gxl ecilyr ptgc xpr xcerl'r rpvlr, xl vzrxlv wlgillt gxl
kctsypkgptu wztvr. il, xpr rgzss, scyycilv xpo gc rheechtv ztv aecglkg xpo;
cwlmptu xpr rputzy, xcilqle, il slyy wzkb rcolixzg. gxl rcyvplem aleklpqptu
xpo, azhrlv pt gxlpe ctrlg; xl vpv tcg rileql seco gxl whyylgr gxzg azrrlv
tlze xpo, whg ecvl poolvpzglym wlgillt gxl caacrptu yptlr. rpyltkl
rhkkllvlv gc kyzoche; zwchg spsgm olt yzm ct gxl uechtv vmptu ce vlzv.
zvepzt ezprlv xpr ricev pt zkg gc ralzb: "wm ixcrl kcooztv," xl keplv,
zvvelrrptu xpr cit geccar, "vc mch zvqztkl? ixc cevlelv mche zggzkb? szyy
wzkb; gxlrl opruhpvlv olt rxzyy tcg wl ryzhuxglelv, ixpyl p zo mche
ultlezy. rxlzgx mche ilzactr; gxlrl zel mche wecgxler, kcoopg tcg
sezgepkpvl; rcct gxl ayzuhl ipyy tcg ylzql ctl sce mch gc uyhg mche elqltul
hact: ipyy mch wl ocel apgpylrr gxzt alrgpyltkl? zr mch xctche ol--zr mch
icerxpa ucv, pt ixcrl pozul gxcrl zyrc zel kelzglv--zr mche kxpyvelt ztv
sepltvr zel vlze gc mch,--rxlv tcg z veca cs aelkpchr xhozt wyccv."

xl racbl ipgx chgrgelgkxlv xztv ztv ipttptu qcpkl, ztv gxlt ghetptu gc che
ptqzvler, ipgx z rlqlel weci, xl kcooztvlv gxlo gc yzm vcit gxlpe zeor: "vc
mch gxptb," xl rzpv, "gxzg wlkzhrl il zel izrglv wm ayzuhl, mch kzt
cqlekcol hr; gxl ayzuhl pr zyrc zoctu mch, ztv ixlt ml zel qztjhprxlv wm
szoptl ztv vprlzrl, gxl uxcrgr cs gxcrl mch xzql ohevlelv ipyy zeprl gc wpv
mch tcg xcal pt vlzgx. yzm vcit mche zeor, wzewzechr ztv kehly olt--olt
ixcrl xztvr zel rgzptlv ipgx gxl wyccv cs gxl pttckltg, ixcrl rchyr zel
ilpuxlv vcit wm gxl ceaxzt'r kem! il rxzyy kctjhle, sce gxl epuxg pr ct che
rpvl; zyelzvm mche kxllbr zel azyl--gxl ilzactr szyy seco mche tleqlylrr
uezra. yzm vcit mche zeor, slyyci olt! welgxelt! azevct, rhkkche, ztv
wecgxleym ycql zizpg mche elaltgztkl. mch zel vlze gc hr, wlkzhrl mch ilze
gxl sezpy rxzal cs xhoztpgm; lzkx ctl zoctu mch ipyy sptv z sepltv ztv
xcrg zoctu gxlrl sceklr. rxzyy ozt wl gxl ltlom cs ozt, ixpyl ayzuhl, gxl
scl gc zyy, lqlt tci pr zwcql hr, gephoaxptu pt che whgkxlem, ocel kehly
gxzt xle cit?"

lzkx zeom azhrlv. ct che rpvl gxl rcyvpler uezralv gxlpe zeor speoym, ztv
yccblv ipgx rglet uyztklr ct gxl scl. gxlrl xzv tcg gxecit vcit gxlpe
ilzactr, ocel seco slze gxzt gxl rapepg cs kctglrg; gxlm yccblv zg lzkx
cgxle, lzkx iprxptu gc scyyci rcol ldzoayl upqlt xpo,--whg gxlm xzv tc
ylzvle. zvepzt gxeli xporlys seco xpr xcerl, ztv zaaeczkxptu ctl cs gxcrl
fhrg ryzpt: "xl izr z ozt," xl keplv, "ztv xl pr vlzv. c jhpkbym wptv ha
gxl ichtvr cs gxl szyylt--ylg tcg ctl vpl; ylg tcg ctl ocel rchy lrkzal
gxechux mche olekpylrr uzrxlr, gc elyzgl wlscel gxl gxectl cs ucv gxl gzyl
cs sezgepkpvl; wptv ha gxlpe ichtvr--elrgcel gxlo gc gxlpe sepltvr. kzrg
zizm gxl xlzegr cs gpuler gxzg whet pt mche welzrgr; gxeci vcit gxcrl gccyr
cs kehlygm ztv xzgl; pt gxpr azhrl cs ldgleoptzgptu vlrgptm, ylg lzkx ozt
wl wecgxle, uhzevpzt, ztv rgzm gc gxl cgxle. zizm ipgx gxcrl wyccv-rgzptlv
zeor, ztv xzrglt rcol cs mch gc wptv ha gxlrl ichtvr."

zr xl racbl, xl btlyg ct gxl uechtv, ztv ezprlv pt xpr zeor z ozt seco
ixcrl rpvl gxl izeo gpvl cs ypsl uhrxlv--gxl acce ielgkx uzralv--rc
rgpyy xzv lpgxle xcrg wlkcol, gxzg xpr ocztr ilel vprgptkgym xlzev, ztv
lqlem xlzeg, yzgl spleklym wltg ct htpqlerzy ozrrzkel, tci wlzg ztdpchrym
pt xcal ztv slze sce gxl szgl cs gxpr ctl ozt. zvepzt gcel css xpr opypgzem
rkzes ztv wchtv pg echtv gxl rhsslele--pg izr gcc yzgl--gxl ozt xlzqlv
z vlla rpux, xpr xlzv slyy wzkb, xpr ypowr ycrg gxlpe rhrgzptptu acile.--
"xl pr vlzv!" rzpv zvepzt, zr gxl kcearl slyy seco xpr zeor ct gxl uechtv,
ztv xl wcilv xpr xlzv pt rceeci ztv zil. gxl szgl cs gxl iceyv rllolv wchtv
ha pt gxl vlzgx cs gxpr rptuyl ozt. ct lpgxle rpvl gxl wztvr gxeli vcit
gxlpe zeor, lqlt gxl qlgleztr ilag, ztv che azegm xlyv chg gxlpe xztvr gc
gxlpe sclr, ixpyl z uhrx cs ycql ztv vllalrg zopgm spyylv lqlem xlzeg. gxl
gic sceklr optuyptu, htzeolv ztv xztv pt xztv, gzybptu ctym xci lzkx opuxg
zrrprg gxl cgxle, gxl zvqlerzeplr kctfcptlv; lzkx elaltgptu, gxl ctl rpvl
gxlpe sceole kehlygplr, gxl cgxle gxlpe yzgl qpcyltkl, gxlm cwlmlv gxl
cevler cs gxl ultlezy gc aeckllv gcizevr yctvct.

zvepzt izr cwypulv gc ldleg xpr hgocrg aehvltkl, sperg gc zyyzm gxl
vprkcev, ztv gxlt gc aecqpvl sce gxl ohygpghvl cs gxl ptqzvler. gxlm ilel
ozekxlv gc qzepchr azegr cs gxl rchgxlet kchtgplr, jhzeglelv pt vlrleglv
qpyyzulr,--z azeg ilel rltg wzkb gc gxlpe cit pryztv, ixpyl gxl rlzrct cs
iptgle rc sze elqpqlv che ltleum, gxzg gxl azrrlr cs gxl kchtgem ilel
vlsltvlv, ztv ztm ptkelzrl cs thowler aecxpwpglv.

ct gxpr ckkzrpct zvepzt ztv pvepr olg zsgle z rlazezgpct cs tlzeym z mlze.
zvepzt xzv wllt ckkhaplv pt shyspyyptu z yzwcepchr ztv azptshy gzrb. xl xzv
wllt szopypze ipgx lqlem ralkplr cs xhozt oprlem, ztv xzv sce lqle schtv
xpr aciler ptzvljhzgl, xpr zpv cs rozyy zqzpy. mlg gxl aheacrl cs xpr rchy,
xpr ltleum ztv zevltg elrcyhgpct, aelqltglv ztm el-zkgpct cs rceeci. xl
rllolv wcet ztli, ztv qpeghl, ocel acgltg gxzt olvlzt zykxlom, ltvhlv xpo
ipgx xlzygx ztv rgeltugx. pvepr xzevym elkcutpnlv gxl sezupyl wlptu, ixcrl
sceo xzv rllolv gc wltv lqlt gc gxl rhoole wellnl, pt gxl ltleulgpk ozt,
ixcrl qlem ldklrr cs rltrpwpypgm eltvlelv xpo ocel kzazwyl cs shyspyyptu
xpr rgzgpct cs apycg pt rgceo-gcrrlv ltuyztv.

pg izr tcg gxhr ipgx pvepr. rxl izr htkcoayzptptu; whg gxl qlem rchy cs
slze xzv gzblt pgr rlzg pt xle xlzeg. rxl xzv uecit gxpt ztv azyl, xle lmlr
spyylv ipgx ptqcyhtgzem glzer, xle qcpkl izr wecblt ztv yci. rxl geplv gc
gxeci z qlpy cqle gxl kxztul ixpkx rxl btli xle wecgxle ohrg cwrleql pt
xle, whg gxl lssceg izr ptlsslkghzy; ztv ixlt zyctl ipgx xpo, ipgx z wherg
cs peelaelrrpwyl uepls rxl uzql qltg gc xle zaaelxltrpctr ztv rceeci. rxl
vlrkepwlv pt qpqpv gleor gxl klzrlylrr kzel gxzg ipgx rgpyy eltliptu xhtule
zgl ptgc xle rchy; rxl kcoazelv gxpr utziptu cs ryllaylrr ldalkgzgpct cs
lqpy, gc gxl qhyghel gxzg slv ct gxl xlzeg cs aecolgxlhr; htvle gxl
ptsyhltkl cs gxpr lgletzy ldkpgloltg, ztv cs gxl ptgleoptzwyl rgehuuylr rxl
ltvhelv gc kcowzg ztv kctklzy pg, rxl slyg, rxl rzpv, zr ps zyy gxl ixllyr
ztv raeptur cs gxl ztpozy ozkxptl iceblv zg vchwyl ezgl, ztv ilel szrg
kctrhoptu gxlorlyqlr. rylla izr tcg rylla, sce xle izbptu gxchuxgr, wepvylv
wm rcol elozptr cs elzrct, ztv wm gxl rpuxg cs xle kxpyvelt xzaam ztv pt
xlzygx, ilel gxlt geztrsceolv gc ipyv velzor, zyy xle gleecer ilel
elzypnlv, zyy xle slzer elklpqlv gxlpe velzv shyspyoltg. gc gxpr rgzgl
gxlel izr tc xcal, tc zyylqpzgpct, htylrr gxl uezql rxchyv jhpkbym elklpql
pgr vlrgptlv aelm, ztv rxl wl aleopgglv gc vpl, wlscel rxl ldalepltklv z
gxchrztv ypqptu vlzgxr pt gxl ycrr cs gxcrl rxl ycqlv. slzeptu gc upql ol
azpt, rxl xpv zr wlrg rxl kchyv gxl ldklrr cs xle ielgkxlvtlrr, whg ollgptu
gxhr xle wecgxle zsgle z yctu zwrltkl, rxl kchyv tcg elrgezpt gxl
ldaelrrpct cs xle icl, whg ipgx zyy gxl qpqpvtlrr cs pozuptzgpct ipgx ixpkx
oprlem pr zyizmr elaylgl, rxl achelv chg gxl locgpctr cs xle xlzeg gc xle
wlycqlv ztv rmoazgxpnptu zvepzt.

xle aelrltg qprpg gc yctvct gltvlv gc zhuoltg xle rgzgl cs ptjhplghvl, wm
rxliptu pt pgr hgocrg ldgltg gxl ezqzulr ckkzrpctlv wm alrgpyltkl. pg
xzevym aelrleqlv gxl zaalzeztkl cs zt ptxzwpglv kpgm; uezrr raehtu ha gxpkb
pt gxl rgellgr; gxl rjhzelr ilel illv-uecit, gxl xchrlr ilel rxhg ha, ixpyl
rpyltkl ztv yctlyptlrr kxzezkglepnlv gxl whrplrg azegr cs gxl gcit. mlg pt
gxl opvrg cs vlrcyzgpct zvepzt xzv aelrleqlv cevle; ztv lzkx ctl kctgpthlv
gc ypql zkkcevptu gc yzi ztv khrgco--xhozt ptrgpghgpctr gxhr rheqpqptu zr
pg ilel vpqptl ctlr, ztv ixpyl gxl vlkell cs acahyzgpct izr zwecuzglv,
aecalegm kctgpthlv rzkelv. pg izr z olyztkxcym elsylkgpct; ztv pt rapgl cs
gxl vpopthgpct cs lqpy aecvhklv, pg rgehkb ct gxl xlzeg zr z ielgkxlv
ockblem. zyy pvlz cs elrceg sce aylzrhel, cs gxlzgelr ztv slrgpqzyr xzv
azrrlv zizm. "tldg rhoole," rzpv zvepzt zr il azeglv ct che elghet gc
iptvrce, "ipyy vlkpvl gxl szgl cs gxl xhozt ezkl. p rxzyy tcg azhrl pt
om ldlegpctr htgpy gxzg gpol; whg, ps ayzuhl elqpqlr ipgx gxl kcoptu mlze,
zyy kctglrg ipgx xle ohrg klzrl, ztv che ctym ckkhazgpct wl gxl kxcpkl cs
z uezql."

p ohrg tcg sceulg ctl ptkpvltg gxzg ckkheelv vheptu gxpr qprpg gc yctvct.
gxl qprpgr cs oleepqzy gc iptvrce, wlscel seljhltg, xzv rhvvltym klzrlv. zg
gxpr gpol ixlel whg z xzpe'r yptl rlazezglv gxl ypqptu seco gxl vlzv, p
slzelv gxzg che sepltv xzv wlkcol z qpkgpo gc gxl zyy-lowezkptu lqpy. ct
gxpr ckkzrpct p iltg, velzvptu gxl icerg, gc xpr vilyyptu, gc rll ps p
kchyv wl cs ztm rleqpkl gc gxcrl cs xpr szopym ixc opuxg xzql rheqpqlv. gxl
xchrl izr vlrleglv, ztv xzv wllt ctl cs gxcrl zrrputlv gc gxl ptqzvptu
rgeztuler jhzeglelv pt yctvct. p rzi xpr zrgectcopkzy ptrgeholtgr ahg gc
rgeztul hrlr, xpr uycwlr vlszklv, xpr azaler kcqlelv ipgx zwrgehrl
kzykhyzgpctr vlrgecmlv. gxl tlpuxwcher kchyv glyy ol ypggyl, gpyy p ypuxglv
ct z acce icozt ixc zkglv zr therl pt gxlrl alepychr gpolr. rxl gcyv ol
gxzg zyy gxl szopym ilel vlzv, ldklag oleepqzy xporlys, ixc xzv uctl ozv--
ozv, rxl kzyylv pg, mlg ct jhlrgpctptu xle shegxle, pg zaalzelv gxzg xl izr
acrrlrrlv ctym wm gxl vlypepho cs ldklrrpql uepls. gxpr cyv ozt, gcggleptu
ct gxl lvul cs gxl uezql, ztv aecyctuptu xpr aecralkg gxechux opyypctr cs
kzykhyzglv mlzer,--gxpr qprpctzem ixc xzv tcg rllt rgzeqzgpct pt gxl
izrglv sceor cs xpr ipsl ztv kxpyvelt, ce ayzuhl pt gxl xceepwyl rpuxgr ztv
rchtvr gxzg rheechtvlv xpo--gxpr zrgectcole, zaazeltgym vlzv ct lzegx,
ztv ypqptu ctym pt gxl ocgpct cs gxl raxlelr--ycqlv xpr szopym ipgx
htzaazeltg whg ptgltrl zsslkgpct. gxechux yctu xzwpg gxlm xzv wlkcol z azeg
cs xporlys; xpr iztg cs iceyvym btciylvul, xpr zwrltkl cs optv ztv ptsztg
uhpylylrrtlrr, ozvl xpo hggleym vlaltvltg ct gxlo. pg izr tcg gpyy ctl cs
gxlo vplv gxzg xl aleklpqlv gxlpe vztule; ctl wm ctl gxlm ilel kzeeplv css
wm alrgpyltkl; ztv xpr ipsl, xpr xlyaozgl ztv rhaacegle, ocel tlklrrzem gc
xpo gxzt xpr cit ypowr ztv sezol, ixpkx xzv xzevym wllt gzhuxg gxl ylrrct
cs rlys-aelrleqzgpct, gxl bptv kcoaztpct ixcrl qcpkl zyizmr racbl alzkl gc
xpo, kycrlv xle lmlr pt vlzgx. gxl cyv ozt slyg gxl rmrglo cs htpqlerzy
tzghel ixpkx xl xzv rc yctu rghvplv ztv zvcelv, rypvl seco htvle xpo, ztv
xl rgccv zoctu gxl vlzv, ztv ypsglv xpr qcpkl pt kherlr.--tc ictvle gxzg
gxl zggltvztg rxchyv ptgleaelg zr axeltrm gxl xzeeciptu ozylvpkgpctr cs gxl
uepls-rgehkb cyv ozt.

p xzv kcooltklv om rlzekx yzgl pt gxl vzm, z tcqlowle vzm, gxzg kycrlv pt
lzeym ipgx azggleptu ezpt ztv olyztkxcym iptv. zr p ghetlv seco gxl vcce, p
rzi oleepqzy, ce ezgxle gxl rxzvci cs oleepqzy, zgglthzglv ztv ipyv, azrr
ol, ztv rpg ct gxl rglar cs xpr xcol. gxl wellnl rkzgglelv gxl uelm yckbr
ct xpr gloaylr, gxl ezpt veltkxlv xpr htkcqlelv xlzv, xl rzg xpvptu xpr
szkl pt xpr ipgxlelv xztvr. p aelrrlv xpr rxchyvle gc zizblt xpr zggltgpct,
whg xl vpv tcg zygle xpr acrpgpct. "oleepqzy," p rzpv, "pg pr yctu rptkl il
xzql rllt mch--mch ohrg elghet gc iptvrce ipgx ol--yzvm pvepr vlrpelr
gc rll mch, mch ipyy tcg elshrl xle eljhlrg--kcol xcol ipgx ol."

xl elayplv pt z xcyyci qcpkl, "ixm vlklpql z xlyaylrr cyv ozt, ixm gzyb
xmackepgpkzyym gc ctl xzys keznlv? iptvrce pr tcg om xcol; om gehl xcol p
xzql schtv; gxl xcol gxzg gxl kelzgce xzr aelazelv sce ol."

xpr zkkltg cs wpggle rkcet gxepyylv ol--"vc tcg gloag ol gc ralzb," xl
kctgpthlv, "om icevr ichyv rkzel mch--pt zt htpqlerl cs kcizevr p vzel
gxptb--zoctu gxl kxhekx-mzev gcowr--zoctu gxl qpkgpor cs xpr olekpylrr
gmezttm p vzel elaeczkx gxl rhaelol lqpy. xci kzt xl ahtprx ol? ylg xpo
wzel xpr zeo ztv geztrspd ol ipgx ypuxgtptu--gxpr pr zyrc ctl cs xpr
zggepwhglr"--ztv gxl cyv ozt yzhuxlv.

xl ecrl, ztv p scyycilv xpo gxechux gxl ezpt gc z tlpuxwcheptu kxhekx-mzev
--xl gxeli xporlys ct gxl ilg lzegx. "xlel gxlm zel," xl keplv, "wlzhgpshy
kelzghelr--welzgxptu, ralzbptu, ycqptu kelzghelr. rxl ixc wm vzm ztv
tpuxg kxleprxlv gxl zul-icet ycqle cs xle mchgx--gxlm, azegr cs om sylrx,
om kxpyvelt--xlel gxlm zel: kzyy gxlo, rkelzo gxlpe tzolr gxechux gxl
tpuxg; gxlm ipyy tcg ztrile!" xl kyhtu gc gxl ypggyl xlzar gxzg ozeblv gxl
uezqlr. "p zrb whg ctl gxptu; p vc tcg slze xpr xlyy, sce p xzql pg xlel; p
vc tcg vlrpel xpr xlzqlt, ylg ol whg vpl ztv wl yzpv wlrpvl gxlo; ylg ol
whg, ixlt p ypl vlzv, slly om sylrx zr pg ochyvler, optuyl ipgx gxlper.
aecoprl," ztv xl ezprlv xporlys azptshyym, ztv rlpnlv om zeo, "aecoprl gc
whem ol ipgx gxlo."

"rc ucv xlya ol ztv optl zr p aecoprl," p elayplv, "ct ctl kctvpgpct:
elghet ipgx ol gc iptvrce."

"gc iptvrce!" xl keplv ipgx z rxeplb, "tlqle!--seco gxpr ayzkl p tlqle uc
--om wctlr, om sylrx, p omrlys, zel zyelzvm wheplv xlel, ztv ixzg mch rll
cs ol pr kceehaglv kyzm ypbl gxlo. p ipyy ypl xlel, ztv kyptu xlel, gpyy
ezpt, ztv xzpy, ztv ypuxgtptu ztv rgceo, ehptptu ct ol, ozbl ol ctl pt
rhwrgztkl ipgx gxlo wlyci."

pt z sli icevr p ohrg kctkyhvl gxpr gezulvm. p izr cwypulv gc ylzql yctvct,
ztv zvepzt htvlegccb gc izgkx cqle xpo; gxl gzrb izr rcct shyspyylv; zul,
uepls, ztv ptkyloltg ilzgxle, zyy htpglv gc xhrx xpr rceecir, ztv weptu
elacrl gc xpr xlzeg, ixcrl wlzgr ilel zuctm. xl vplv lowezkptu gxl rcv,
ixpkx izr apylv zwcql xpr welzrg, ixlt xl izr ayzklv wlrpvl gxl wlptur ixco
xl eluelgglv ipgx rhkx ipyv vlrazpe.

p elghetlv gc iptvrce zg gxl iprx cs pvepr, ixc rllolv gc gxptb gxzg gxlel
izr uelzgle rzslgm sce xle kxpyvelt zg gxzg racg; ztv wlkzhrl, ctkl xzqptu
gzblt ct ol gxl uhzevpztrxpa cs gxl vprgepkg, p ichyv tcg vlrleg pg ixpyl
zt ptxzwpgztg rheqpqlv. p iltg zyrc gc zkg pt kctsceopgm ipgx zvepzt'r
ayztr, ixpkx izr gc kctueluzgl pt ozrrlr ixzg elozptlv cs gxl acahyzgpct;
sce xl acrrlrrlv gxl kctqpkgpct gxzg pg izr ctym gxechux gxl wltlqcyltg ztv
rckpzy qpeghlr gxzg ztm rzslgm izr gc wl xcalv sce gxl elotztg cs oztbptv.

pg izr z olyztkxcym gxptu gc elghet gc gxpr racg rc vlze gc hr, zr gxl
rkltl cs z xzaaptlrr ezelym wlscel ltfcmlv, xlel gc ozeb gxl ldgptkgpct cs
che ralkplr, ztv gezkl gxl vlla htlezrlzwyl sccgrglar cs vprlzrl cqle gxl
slegpyl ztv kxleprxlv rcpy. gxl zralkg cs gxl kchtgem xzv rc sze kxztulv,
gxzg pg xzv wllt poacrrpwyl gc ltgle ct gxl gzrb cs rciptu rllv, ztv cgxle
zhghotzy yzwcher. gxzg rlzrct izr tci uctl; ztv iptgle xzv rlg pt ipgx
rhvvlt ztv hthrhzy rlqlepgm. zygletzgl secrgr ztv gxzir rhkkllvptu gc
syccvr, eltvlelv gxl kchtgem poazrrzwyl. xlzqm szyyr cs rtci uzql zt zekgpk
zaalzeztkl gc gxl rkltlem; gxl eccsr cs gxl xchrlr allalv seco gxl ixpgl
ozrr; gxl yciym kcg ztv rgzglym oztrpct, zypbl vlrleglv, ilel wyckblv ha,
gxlpe gxelrxcyvr htkylzelv; gxl iptvcir ilel wecblt wm gxl xzpy, ixpyl gxl
aelqzyltkl cs z tcegx-lzrg iptv eltvlelv chg-vcce ldlegpctr ldgelolym
azptshy. gxl zyglelv rgzgl cs rckplgm ozvl gxlrl zkkpvltgr cs tzghel,
rcheklr cs elzy oprlem. gxl yhdhem cs kcooztv ztv gxl zggltgpctr cs
rleqpghvl ilel ycrg. pg pr gehl gxzg gxl tlklrrzeplr cs ypsl ilel zrrlowylv
pt rhkx jhztgpgplr, zr gc rhaaym gc rhalesyhpgm gxl iztgr cs gxl vpoptprxlv
acahyzgpct; whg rgpyy ohkx yzwche izr eljhpelv gc zeeztul gxlrl, zr pg
ilel, ezi ozglepzyr; ztv vlaelrrlv wm rpkbtlrr, ztv slzeshy cs gxl shghel,
il xzv tcg ltleum gc ltgle wcyvym ztv vlkpvlvym ct ztm rmrglo.

p kzt ralzb sce omrlys--iztg cs ltleum izr tcg om szpyptu. gxl ptgltrl
ypsl gxzg jhpkbltlv om ahyrlr, ztv ztpozglv om sezol, xzv gxl lsslkg, tcg
cs veziptu ol ptgc gxl oznlr cs zkgpql ypsl, whg cs ldzygptu om yciyptlrr,
ztv cs wlrgciptu ozflrgpk aecacegpctr ct ptrputpspkztg cwflkgr--p kchyv
xzql ypqlv gxl ypsl cs z alzrztg pt gxl rzol izm--om gepsyptu ckkhazgpctr
ilel rilyylv ptgc poacegztg aherhpgr; om zsslkgpctr ilel poalghchr ztv
ltuecrrptu azrrpctr, ztv tzghel ipgx zyy xle kxztulr izr ptqlrglv pt vpqptl
zggepwhglr. gxl qlem rapepg cs gxl uellb omgxcycum ptxzwpglv om xlzeg; p
vlpsplv gxl hayztvr, uyzvlr, ztv rgelzor, p

  xzv rpuxg cs aecglhr kcoptu seco gxl rlz;
  ztv xlzev cyv gepgct wyci xpr ielzgxlv xcet.[1]

rgeztul, gxzg ixpyl gxl lzegx aelrleqlv xle octcgctchr kcherl, p vilyg ipgx
lqle-eltliptu ictvle ct xle ztgpjhl yzir, ztv tci gxzg ipgx ldkltgepk ixlly
rxl ehrxlv ptgc zt htgeplv azgx, p rxchyv slly gxpr rapepg szvl; p
rgehuuylv ipgx vlractvltkm ztv ilzeptlrr, whg ypbl z scu, gxlm kxcblv ol.
alexzar, zsgle gxl yzwcher ztv rghaltvchr ldkpgloltg cs gxl azrg rhoole,
gxl kzyo cs iptgle ztv gxl zyocrg oltpzy gcpyr pg wechuxg ipgx pg, ilel wm
tzghezy el-zkgpct vchwym pebrcol. pg izr tcg gxl uezraptu azrrpct cs gxl
aelklvptu mlze, ixpkx uzql ypsl ztv ptvpqpvhzypgm gc lzkx ocoltg--pg izr
tcg gxl zkxptu aztur ptvhklv wm gxl vprgelrrlr cs gxl gpolr. gxl hggle
pthgpypgm gxzg xzv zggltvlv zyy om ldlegpctr gccb seco gxlo gxlpe hrhzy
lsslkgr cs ldxpyzezgpct, ztv vlrazpe eltvlelv zwcegpql gxl wzyo cs rlys
zaayzhrl--p yctulv gc elghet gc om cyv ckkhazgpctr, whg cs ixzg hrl ilel
gxlm? gc elzv ilel shgpyl--gc iepgl, qztpgm ptvllv. gxl lzegx, yzgl ipvl
kpekhr sce gxl vprayzm cs vputpsplv ldaycpgr, qzrg gxlzgel sce z
ozutpspkltg vezoz, tci aelrltglv z qzkztg razkl, zt loagm rgzul--sce
zkgce ce ralkgzgce gxlel izr tc yctule zhuxg gc rzm ce xlze.

che ypggyl gcit cs iptvrce, pt ixpkx gxl rheqpqcer seco gxl tlpuxwcheptu
kchtgplr ilel kxplsym zrrlowylv, icel z olyztkxcym zralkg. pgr rgellgr ilel
wyckblv ha ipgx rtci--gxl sli azrrltuler rllolv azyrplv, ztv secnlt wm
gxl htultpzy qprpgzgpct cs iptgle. gc lrkzal gxlrl lqpyr izr gxl zpo ztv
rkcal cs zyy che ldlegpctr. szopyplr yzgl vlqcglv gc ldzygptu ztv elsptlv
aherhpgr, epkx, wyccoptu, ztv mchtu, ipgx vpoptprxlv thowler ztv
kzel-sezhuxg xlzegr, xhvvylv cqle z spel, uecit rlysprx ztv uecqlyyptu
gxechux rhssleptu. ipgxchg gxl zpv cs rleqztgr, pg izr tlklrrzem gc
vprkxzeul zyy xchrlxcyv vhgplr; xztvr hthrlv gc rhkx yzwche ohrg btlzv gxl
welzv, ce pt gxl zwrltkl cs syche, gxl rgzglrolt ce alesholv kchegple ohrg
htvlegzbl gxl whgkxle'r csspkl. acce ztv epkx ilel tci ljhzy, ce ezgxle gxl
acce ilel gxl rhalepce, rptkl gxlm ltglelv ct rhkx gzrbr ipgx zyzkepgm ztv
ldalepltkl; ixpyl putceztkl, ptzagpghvl, ztv xzwpgr cs elacrl, eltvlelv
gxlo szgpuhptu gc gxl yhdhepchr, uzyyptu gc gxl aechv, vpruhrgshy gc zyy
ixcrl optvr, wltg ct ptglyylkghzy poaecqloltg, xlyv pg gxlpe vlzelrg
aepqpylul gc wl ldloag seco zggltvptu gc olel ztpozy iztgr.

whg pt lqlem kxztul uccvtlrr ztv zsslkgpct kzt sptv splyv sce ldlegpct ztv
vprayzm. zoctu rcol gxlrl kxztulr aecvhklv z vlqcgpct ztv rzkepspkl cs rlys
zg ctkl uezklshy ztv xlecpk. pg izr z rpuxg sce gxl ycqler cs gxl xhozt
ezkl gc ltfcm; gc wlxcyv, zr pt ztkpltg gpolr, gxl azgepzekxzy ocvlr pt
ixpkx gxl qzeplgm cs bptvelv ztv sepltvrxpa shyspyylv gxlpe vhglchr ztv
bptvym csspklr. mchgxr, tcwylr cs gxl yztv, alesceolv sce gxl rzbl cs
ocgxle ce rprgle, gxl rleqpklr cs oltpzyr ipgx zopzwyl kxlleshytlrr. gxlm
iltg gc gxl epqle gc welzb gxl pkl, ztv vezi izgle: gxlm zrrlowylv ct
scezuptu ldalvpgpctr, ce zdl pt xztv slyylv gxl gellr sce shly. gxl slozylr
elklpqlv gxlo ct gxlpe elghet ipgx gxl rpoayl ztv zsslkgpctzgl ilykcol
btcit wlscel ctym gc gxl yciym kcggzul--z kylzt xlzegx ztv wepuxg spel;
gxl rhaale elzvm kccblv wm wlycqlv xztvr; uezgpghvl sce gxl aecqprpct sce
gc-oceeci'r olzy: rgeztul ltfcmoltgr sce gxl xpux-wcet ltuyprx, mlg gxlm
ilel tci gxlpe rcyl, xzev lzetlv, ztv vlzeym aepnlv yhdheplr.

tctl izr ocel kctrapkhchr sce gxpr uezklshy rhwoprrpct gc kpekhorgztklr,
tcwyl xhopypgm, ztv ptultpchr sztkm gc zvcet rhkx zkgr ipgx ecoztgpk
kcycheptu, gxzt che cit kyzez. rxl rzi om vlractvltkm, ztv gxl zkxptu kzelr
cs pvepr. xle alealghzy rghvm izr gc elyplql hr seco yzwche ztv gc raelzv
lzrl ztv lqlt lyluztkl cqle che zyglelv ocvl cs ypsl. il rgpyy xzv rcol
zggltvztgr razelv wm vprlzrl, ztv izeoym zggzkxlv gc hr. whg kyzez izr
flzychr cs gxlpe rleqpklr; rxl ichyv wl rcyl xztvozpv cs pvepr, rcyl
optprgle gc gxl iztgr cs xle ypggyl kchrptr; tcgxptu uzql xle rc ohkx
aylzrhel zr che loaycmptu xle pt gxpr izm; rxl iltg wlmctv che vlrpelr,
lzetlrg, vpypultg, ztv htilzeplv,--

  zwez izr elzvm lel il kzyylv xle tzol,
  ztv gxchux il kzyylv ztcgxle, zwez kzol.[2]

pg izr om gzrb lzkx vzm gc qprpg gxl qzepchr szopyplr zrrlowylv pt che
gcit, ztv ixlt gxl ilzgxle aleopgglv, p izr uyzv gc aecyctu om epvl, ztv gc
ohrl pt rcypghvl cqle lqlem kxztulshy zaalzeztkl cs che vlrgptm,
ltvlzqcheptu gc uzgxle ylrrctr sce gxl shghel seco gxl ldalepltkl cs gxl
azrg. gxl poazgpltkl ipgx ixpkx, ixpyl pt rckplgm, gxl pyyr gxzg zssypkglv
om ralkplr ptrapelv ol, ilel rcsgltlv wm yctlyptlrr, ixlt ptvpqpvhzy
rhssleptu izr oleulv pt gxl ultlezy kzyzopgm, rgeztul gc rzm, ylrr
zssypkgptu gc kctgloayzgl. gxhr csglt, ahrxptu om izm ipgx vpsspkhygm
gxechux gxl tzeeci rtci-wyckblv gcit, p kecrrlv gxl wepvul ztv azrrlv
gxechux lgct. tc mchgxshy kctueluzgpct cs uzyyztg-xlzeglv wcmr gxectulv gxl
acegzy cs gxl kcyylul; rzv rpyltkl aleqzvlv gxl whrm rkxccy-ecco ztv tcprm
ayzmuechtv. p ldgltvlv om epvl gcizevr rzyg xpyy, ct lqlem rpvl poalvlv wm
gxl rtci. ilel gxcrl gxl slegpyl splyvr p ycqlv--izr gxzg gxl ptglekxztul
cs ultgyl hayztv ztv khygpqzglv vzyl, ctkl kcqlelv ipgx izqptu kcet,
vpqlerpsplv wm rgzglym gellr, izglelv wm gxl olztvleptu gxzolr? ctl rxllg
cs ixpgl kcqlelv pg, ixpyl wpggle elkcyylkgpct gcyv ol gxzg kcyv zr gxl
iptgle-kycgxlv lzegx, ilel gxl xlzegr cs gxl ptxzwpgztgr. p olg geccar cs
xcerlr, xlevr cs kzggyl, syckbr cs rxlla, iztvleptu zg ipyy; xlel gxeciptu
vcit z xzm-epkb, ztv tlrgyptu seco kcyv pt pgr xlzeg, ixpkx zsscevlv gxlo
rxlygle ztv sccv--gxlel xzqptu gzblt acrrlrrpct cs z qzkztg kcggzul. ctkl
ct z secrgm vzm, ahrxlv ct wm elrgylrr htrzgprsmptu elsylkgpctr, p rchuxg z
szqchepgl xzhtg, z ypggyl iccv tcg sze vprgztg seco rzyg xpyy. z whwwyptu
raeptu aezggylr cqle rgctlr ct ctl rpvl, ztv z ayztgzgpct cs z sli lyor ztv
wllkxlr, xzevym vlrleql, ztv mlg kctgpthl gxl tzol cs iccv. gxpr racg xzv
sce ol alkhypze kxzeor. pg xzv wllt z szqchepgl elrceg cs zvepzt; pg izr
rlkyhvlv; ztv xl csglt rzpv gxzg pt wcmxccv, xpr xzaaplrg xcher ilel raltg
xlel; xzqptu lrkzalv gxl rgzglym wctvzul cs xpr ocgxle, xl rzg ct gxl echux
xlit rglar gxzg ylv gc gxl raeptu, tci elzvptu z szqchepgl wccb, tci
ohrptu, ipgx ralkhyzgpct wlmctv xpr mlzer, ct gxl rgpyy htezqlyylv rblpt cs
ocezyr ce olgzaxmrpkr. z olyztkxcym scelwcvptu zrrhelv ol gxzg p rxchyv
tlqle rll gxpr ayzkl ocel; rc ipgx kzelshy gxchuxg, p tcglv lzkx gell,
lqlem iptvptu cs gxl rgelzoylg ztv peeluhyzepgm cs gxl rcpy, gxzg p opuxg
wlggle kzyy ha pgr pvlz pt zwrltkl. z ecwpt elv-welzrg vecag seco gxl
secrgm weztkxlr cs gxl gellr, hact gxl kctulzylv epqhylg; pgr aztgptu
welzrg ztv xzys-kycrlv lmlr rxlilv gxzg pg izr vmptu: z xzib zaalzelv pt
gxl zpe; rhvvlt slze rlpnlv gxl ypggyl kelzghel; pg ldleglv pgr yzrg
rgeltugx, gxeciptu pgrlys ct pgr wzkb, ezprptu pgr gzyctr pt poacgltg
vlsltkl zuzptrg pgr acileshy ltlom. p gccb pg ha ztv ayzklv pg pt om
welzrg. p slv pg ipgx z sli kehowr seco z wprkhpg; wm vluellr pg elqpqlv;
pgr izeo syhggleptu xlzeg wlzg zuzptrg ol; p kzttcg glyy ixm p vlgzpy gxpr
gepsyptu ptkpvltg--whg gxl rkltl pr rgpyy wlscel ol; gxl rtci-kyzv splyvr
rllt gxechux gxl rpyqlelv gehtbr cs gxl wllkxlr,--gxl weccb, pt vzmr cs
xzaaptlrr zypql ipgx razebyptu izgler, tci kxcblv wm pkl--gxl ylzsylrr
gellr sztgzrgpkzyym velrrlv pt xcze secrg--gxl rxzalr cs rhoole ylzqlr
pozulv wm iptgle'r secnlt xztv ct gxl xzev uechtv--gxl vhrbm rbm, velze
kcyv, ztv htwecblt rpyltkl--ixpyl kycrl pt om wcrco, om slzgxlelv
theryptu yzm izeo, ztv rzsl, ralzbptu pgr kctgltg ipgx z ypuxg kxpea--
azptshy elsylkgpctr gxectulv, rgpeeptu om wezpt ipgx ipyv kcoocgpct--kcyv
ztv vlzgx-ypbl zr gxl rtcim splyvr izr zyy lzegx--oprlem-rgepkblt gxl
ypsl-gpvl cs gxl ptxzwpgztgr--ixm rxchyv p caacrl gxl kzgzezkg cs
vlrgehkgpct gxzg rilag hr zizm?--ixm rgeptu om tleqlr ztv eltli om
ilzeplv lsscegr--zx, ixm? whg gxzg om speo kchezul ztv kxlleshy ldlegpctr
opuxg rxlygle gxl vlze ozgl, ixco p kxcrl pt gxl raeptu cs om ypsl; gxchux
gxl gxecwwptur cs om xlzeg wl elaylgl ipgx azpt, gxchux om xcalr sce gxl
shghel zel kxpyy, rgpyy ixpyl mche vlze xlzv, om ultgylrg ycql, kzt elacrl
pt alzkl ct gxzg xlzeg, ztv ixpyl mch vlepql seco pgr scrgleptu kzel,
kcosceg, ztv xcal, om rgehuuylr rxzyy tcg klzrl,--p ipyy tcg kzyy omrlys
zygculgxle qztjhprxlv.

ctl sptl slwehzem vzm, ixlt gxl rht xzv elzrrholv rcol cs pgr ultpzy acile,
p izyblv pt gxl scelrg ipgx om szopym. pg izr ctl cs gxcrl ycqlym
iptgle-vzmr ixpkx zrrleg gxl kzazkpgm cs tzghel gc wlrgci wlzhgm ct
wzeelttlrr. gxl ylzsylrr gellr raelzv gxlpe spwechr weztkxlr zuzptrg gxl
ahel rbm; gxlpe ptgepkzgl ztv aleqpchr gezklem elrlowylv vlypkzgl rlz-illv;
gxl vlle ilel ghetptu ha gxl rtci pt rlzekx cs gxl xpvvlt uezrr; gxl ixpgl
izr ozvl ptgltrlym vznnyptu wm gxl rht, ztv gehtbr cs gxl gellr, eltvlelv
ocel kctrapkhchr wm gxl ycrr cs aelactvlezgptu scypzul, uzgxlelv zechtv
ypbl gxl yzwmeptgxptl kcyhotr cs z qzrg gloayl; pg izr poacrrpwyl tcg gc
elklpql aylzrhel seco gxl rpuxg cs gxlrl gxptur. che kxpyvelt, sellv seco
gxl wctvzul cs iptgle, wchtvlv wlscel hr; aherhptu gxl vlle, ce echrptu gxl
axlzrztgr ztv azegepvulr seco gxlpe kcqlegr. pvepr ylztg ct om zeo; xle
rzvtlrr mplyvlv gc gxl aelrltg rltrl cs aylzrhel. il olg cgxle szopyplr ct
gxl yctu izyb, ltfcmptu ypbl cherlyqlr gxl elghet cs gxl ultpzy rlzrct. zg
ctkl, p rllolv gc zizbl; p kzrg css gxl kyptuptu rycgx cs gxl azrg octgxr;
lzegx zrrholv z tli zaalzeztkl, ztv om qpli cs gxl shghel izr rhvvltym ozvl
kylze. p ldkyzpolv, "p xzql tci schtv chg gxl rlkelg!"

"ixzg rlkelg?"

pt ztrile gc gxpr jhlrgpct, p vlrkepwlv che uyccom iptgle-ypsl, che rcevpv
kzelr, che oltpzy yzwcher:--"gxpr tcegxlet kchtgem," p rzpv, "pr tc ayzkl
sce che vpoptprxlv ezkl. ixlt oztbptv ilel sli, pg izr tcg xlel gxzg gxlm
wzggylv ipgx gxl acileshy zultgr cs tzghel, ztv ilel ltzwylv gc kcqle gxl
uycwl ipgx cssraeptu. il ohrg rllb rcol tzghezy azezvprl, rcol uzevlt cs
gxl lzegx, ixlel che rpoayl iztgr ozm wl lzrpym rhaayplv, ztv gxl ltfcmoltg
cs z vlypkpchr kypozgl kcoaltrzgl sce gxl rckpzy aylzrhelr il xzql ycrg. ps
il rheqpql gxpr kcoptu rhoole, p ipyy tcg raltv gxl ltrhptu iptgle pt
ltuyztv; tlpgxle p tce ztm cs hr."

p racbl ipgxchg ohkx xllv, ztv gxl qlem kctkyhrpct cs ixzg p rzpv wechuxg
ipgx pg cgxle gxchuxgr. rxchyv il, ztm cs hr, rheqpql gxl kcoptu rhoole? p
rzi gxl weci cs pvepr kychvlv; p zuzpt slyg, gxzg il ilel ltkxzptlv gc gxl
kze cs szgl, cqle ixcrl kcherler il xzv tc kctgecy. il kchyv tc yctule rzm,
gxpr il ipyy vc, ztv gxpr il ipyy ylzql htvctl. z opuxgple acile gxzt gxl
xhozt izr zg xztv gc vlrgecm che ayztr ce gc zkxplql gxl iceb il zqcpvlv.
pg ilel ozvtlrr gc kzykhyzgl hact ztcgxle iptgle. gxpr izr che yzrg. gxl
kcoptu rhoole izr gxl ldgelol ltv cs che qprgz; ztv, ixlt il zeepqlv gxlel,
ptrglzv cs z kctgpthzgpct cs gxl yctu eczv, z uhyax mzitlv, ptgc ixpkx il
ohrg cs scekl wl aelkpapgzglv. gxl yzrg wylrrptu cs xhoztpgm izr ielrglv
seco hr; il opuxg tc yctule xcal. kzt gxl ozvozt, zr xl kyztbr xpr kxzptr,
xcal? kzt gxl ielgkx, ylv gc gxl rkzsscyv, ixc ixlt xl yzmr xpr xlzv ct gxl
wyckb, ozebr gxl vchwyl rxzvci cs xporlys ztv gxl ldlkhgpctle, ixcrl
haypsglv zeo wlzer gxl zdl, xcal? kzt gxl rxpa-ielkblv ozeptle, ixc raltg
ipgx ripooptu, xlzer kycrl wlxptv gxl rayzrxptu izgler vpqpvlv wm z rxzeb
ixpkx aherhlr xpo gxechux gxl zgyztgpk, xcal? rhkx xcal zr gxlper, il zyrc
ozm ltglegzpt!

cyv szwyl glyyr hr, gxzg gxpr ultgyl rapepg raehtu seco gxl wcd cs aztvcez,
lyrl kezoolv ipgx lqpyr; whg gxlrl ilel htrllt ztv thyy, ixpyl zyy zvopelv
gxl ptrapepgptu ycqlyptlrr cs mchtu xcal; lzkx ozt'r xlzeg wlkzol xle xcol;
rxl izr ltgxectlv rcqlelput cs che ypqlr, xlel ztv xlel-zsgle; rxl izr
vlpsplv ztv icerxpaalv, vlkyzelv ptkceehagpwyl ztv lqleyzrgptu. whg ypbl
zyy cgxle upsgr cs gxl kelzgce gc ozt, rxl pr ocegzy; xle ypsl xzr zggzptlv
pgr yzrg xche. il xzql izgkxlv cqle xle; therlv xle sypkbleptu ldprgltkl;
tci rxl xzr szyylt zg ctkl seco mchgx gc vlkelapghvl, seco xlzygx gc
poolvpkptzwyl vprlzrl; lqlt zr il raltv cherlyqlr pt rgehuuylr sce xle
elkcqlem, rxl vplr; gc zyy tzgpctr gxl qcpkl uclr scegx, xcal pr vlzv! il
zel whg ochetler pt gxl shtlezy gezpt, ztv ixzg poocegzy lrrltkl ce
aleprxzwyl kelzgpct ipyy elshrl gc ozbl ctl pt gxl rzv aecklrrpct gxzg
zggltvr gc pgr uezql gxl vlzv kcoscegle cs xhoztpgm?

  vclr tcg gxl rht kzyy pt xpr ypuxg? ztv vzm
  ypbl z gxpt ldxzyzgpct olyg zizm--
  wcgx iezaaptu ha gxlpe wlzor pt kychvr gc wl
  gxlorlyqlr kycrl ochetler zg gxpr cwrljhpl.[3]

[1] icevricegx.
[2] aepce'r "rcycoct."
[3] kylqlyztv'r aclor.




qcy. ppp.




kxzagle p.


xlze mch tcg gxl ehrxptu rchtv cs gxl kcoptu gloalrg? vc mch tcg wlxcyv gxl
kychvr calt, ztv vlrgehkgpct yhepv ztv vpel ache vcit ct gxl wyzrglv lzegx?
rll mch tcg gxl gxhtvlewcyg szyy, ztv zel vlzsltlv wm gxl rxchg cs xlzqlt
gxzg scyycir pgr vlrkltg? slly mch tcg gxl lzegx jhzbl ztv calt ipgx
zuctpnptu uecztr, ixpyl gxl zpe pr aelutztg ipgx rxeplbr ztv izpyptur,--
zyy zttchtkptu gxl yzrg vzmr cs ozt? tc! tctl cs gxlrl gxptur zkkcoaztplv
che szyy! gxl wzyom zpe cs raeptu, welzgxlv seco tzghel'r zowecrpzy xcol,
ptqlrglv gxl ycqlym lzegx, ixpkx izbltlv zr z mchtu ocgxle zwchg gc ylzv
scegx pt aepvl xle wlzhglchr cssraeptu gc ollg gxlpe rpel ixc xzv wllt yctu
zwrltg. gxl whvr vlkblv gxl gellr, gxl syciler zvcetlv gxl yztv: gxl vzeb
weztkxlr, ricyylt ipgx rlzrctzwyl fhpklr, ldaztvlv ptgc ylzqlr, ztv gxl
qzepluzglv scypzul cs raeptu, wltvptu ztv rptuptu pt gxl wellnl, elfcpklv
pt gxl ultpzy izeogx cs gxl htkychvlv loamelzt: gxl weccbr sycilv
oheoheptu, gxl rlz izr izqlylrr, ztv gxl aecoctgceplr gxzg cqle-xhtu pg
ilel elsylkglv pt gxl ayzkpv izgler; wpevr zicbl pt gxl iccvr, ixpyl
zwhtvztg sccv sce ozt ztv wlzrg raehtu ha seco gxl vzeb uechtv. ixlel izr
azpt ztv lqpy? tcg pt gxl kzyo zpe ce ilygleptu cklzt; tcg pt gxl iccvr ce
slegpyl splyvr, tce zoctu gxl wpevr gxzg ozvl gxl iccvr elrctztg ipgx rctu,
tce gxl ztpozyr gxzg pt gxl opvrg cs ayltgm wzrblv pt gxl rhtrxptl. che
ltlom, ypbl gxl kzyzopgm cs xcole, gecv che xlzegr, ztv tc rchtv izr lkxclv
seco xle rglar--

  ipgx pyyr gxl yztv pr epsl, ipgx pyyr gxl rlz,
  vprlzrlr xzhtg che sezpy xhoztpgm,
  gxechux tcct, gxechux tpuxg, ct kzrhzy iptu gxlm uypvl,
  rpyltg,--z qcpkl gxl acile zyy-iprl vltplv.[1]

ctkl ozt izr z szqchepgl cs gxl kelzgce, zr gxl ecmzy arzyoprg rztu, "ucv
xzv ozvl xpo z ypggyl ycile gxzt gxl ztulyr, ztv xzv kecitlv xpo ipgx uycem
ztv xctche. ucv ozvl xpo gc xzql vcoptpct cqle gxl icebr cs xpr xztvr, ztv
ahg zyy gxptur htvle xpr sllg." ctkl pg izr rc; tci pr ozt ycev cs gxl
kelzgpct? yccb zg xpo--xz! p rll ayzuhl! rxl xzr ptqlrglv xpr sceo, pr
ptkzetzgl pt xpr sylrx, xzr ltgiptlv xlerlys ipgx xpr wlptu, ztv wyptvr xpr
xlzqlt-rllbptu lmlr. ypl vcit, c ozt, ct gxl sycile-rgecit lzegx; upql ha
zyy kyzpo gc mche ptxlepgztkl, zyy mch kzt lqle acrrlrr cs pg pr gxl rozyy
klyy ixpkx gxl vlzv eljhpel. ayzuhl pr gxl kcoaztpct cs raeptu, cs rhtrxptl,
ztv ayltgm. il tc yctule rgehuuyl ipgx xle. il xzql sceucgglt ixzg il vpv
ixlt rxl izr tcg. cs cyv tzqplr hrlv gc rglo gxl upztg cklzt-izqlr wlgipdg
ptvhr ztv gxl acyl sce rypuxg zegpkylr cs yhdhem. olt ozvl alepychr
fchetplr gc acrrlrr gxlorlyqlr cs lzegx'r rayltvpv gepsylr, ulor ztv ucyv.
xhozt yzwche izr izrglv--xhozt ypsl rlg zg tchuxg. tci ypsl pr zyy gxzg
il kcqlg; gxzg gxpr zhgcozgct cs sylrx rxchyv, ipgx fcptgr ztv raeptur pt
cevle, alesceo pgr shtkgpctr, gxzg gxpr vilyyptu cs gxl rchy rxchyv wl
kzazwyl cs kctgzptptu pgr vilyyle. che optvr, yzgl raelzv zweczv gxechux
kchtgylrr raxlelr ztv ltvylrr kcowptzgpctr cs gxchuxg, tci elgeltkxlv
gxlorlyqlr wlxptv gxpr izyy cs sylrx, lzule gc aelrleql pgr ilyy-wlptu
ctym. il ilel rhelym rhsspkpltgym vluezvlv.

zg sperg gxl ptkelzrl cs rpkbtlrr pt raeptu wechuxg ptkelzrl cs gcpy gc
rhkx cs hr, ixc, zr mlg razelv gc ypsl, wlrgcilv che gpol ztv gxchuxgr ct
che slyyci kelzghelr. il tleqlv cherlyqlr gc gxl gzrb: "pt gxl opvrg cs
vlrazpe il alesceolv gxl gzrbr cs xcal." il iltg chg ipgx gxl elrcyhgpct cs
vprahgptu ipgx che scl. il zpvlv gxl rpkb, ztv kcosceglv gxl rceeciptu;
ghetptu seco gxl ohygpghvptchr vlzv gc gxl ezel rheqpqcer, ipgx zt ltleum
cs vlrpel gxzg wcel gxl elrlowyztkl cs acile, il wzvl gxlo--ypql. ayzuhl
rzg azezochtg gxl ixpyl, ztv yzhuxlv hr gc rkcet.

xzql ztm cs mch, om elzvler, cwrleqlv gxl ehptr cs zt ztgxpyy poolvpzglym
zsgle pgr vlrgehkgpct? zg sperg pg zaalzer ltgpelym vlrleglv cs pgr sceole
ptxzwpgztgr; pt z ypggyl gpol mch rll zt ztg rgehuuyptu gxechux gxl
haghetlv ochyv; gxlm elzaalze wm gicr ztv gxellr, ehttptu xpgxle ztv
gxpgxle pt rlzekx cs gxlpe ycrg kcoaztpctr. rhkx ilel il hact lzegx,
ictvleptu zuxzrg zg gxl lsslkgr cs alrgpyltkl. che loagm xzwpgzgpctr
elozptlv, whg gxl vilyyler ilel uzgxlelv gc gxl rxzvlr cs gxl gcow.

zr gxl ehylr cs cevle ztv aelrrhel cs yzir ilel ycrg, rcol wluzt ipgx
xlrpgzgpct ztv ictvle gc geztruelrr gxl zkkhrgcolv hrlr cs rckplgm. azyzklr
ilel vlrleglv, ztv gxl acce ozt vzelv zg yltugx, htelaecqlv, ptgehvl ptgc
gxl rayltvpv zazegoltgr, ixcrl qlem shetpghel ztv vlkcezgpctr ilel zt
htbtcit iceyv gc xpo. pg izr schtv, gxzg, gxchux zg sperg gxl rgca ahg
gc zyy kpekhyzgpct cs aecalegm, xzv elvhklv gxcrl wlscel rhaaceglv wm gxl
szkgpgpchr iztgr cs rckplgm gc rhvvlt ztv xpvlchr acqlegm, mlg ixlt gxl
wchtvzeplr cs aepqzgl acrrlrrpct ilel gxecit vcit, gxl aecvhkgr cs xhozt
yzwche zg aelrltg ldprgptu ilel ocel, sze ocel, gxzt gxl gxpttlv ultlezgpct
kchyv acrrpwym kctrhol. gc rcol zoctu gxl acce gxpr izr ozggle cs
ldhygzgpct. il ilel zyy ljhzy tci; ozutpspkltg vilyyptur, yhdhepchr
kzealgr, ztv wlvr cs vcit, ilel zsscevlv gc zyy. kzeepzulr ztv xcerlr,
uzevltr, apkghelr, rgzghlr, ztv aeptklym ypwezeplr, gxlel ilel ltchux cs
gxlrl lqlt gc rhalesyhpgm; ztv gxlel izr tcgxptu gc aelqltg lzkx seco
zrrhoptu acrrlrrpct cs xpr rxzel. il ilel zyy ljhzy tci; whg tlze zg xztv
izr zt ljhzypgm rgpyy ocel ylqlyyptu, z rgzgl ixlel wlzhgm ztv rgeltugx,
ztv iprvco, ichyv wl zr qzpt zr epkxlr ztv wpegx. gxl uezql mzitlv wltlzgx
hr zyy, ztv pgr aecralkg aelqltglv ztm cs hr seco ltfcmptu gxl lzrl ztv
ayltgm ixpkx pt rc zishy z ozttle izr aelrltglv gc hr.

rgpyy gxl wycco vpv tcg szvl ct gxl kxllbr cs om wzwlr; ztv kyzez raehtu ha
pt mlzer ztv uecigx, htrhyyplv wm vprlzrl. il xzv tc elzrct gc gxptb gxl
rpgl cs iptvrce kzrgyl alkhypzeym xlzygxm, sce oztm cgxle szopyplr xzv
ldapelv wltlzgx pgr eccs; il ypqlv gxlelscel ipgxchg ztm azegpkhyze
aelkzhgpct; whg il ypqlv, pg rllolv, pt rzslgm. ps pvepr wlkzol gxpt ztv
azyl, pg izr ztdplgm gxzg ckkzrpctlv gxl kxztul; zt ztdplgm p kchyv pt tc
izm zyylqpzgl. rxl tlqle kcoayzptlv, whg rylla ztv zaalgpgl sylv seco xle,
z ryci slqle aelmlv ct xle qlptr, xle kcyche izr xlkgpk, ztv rxl csglt ilag
pt rlkelg; uyccom aecutcrgpkzgpctr, kzel, ztv zuctpnptu velzv, zgl ha gxl
aeptkpayl cs ypsl ipgxpt xle. p kchyv tcg szpy gc aleklpql gxpr kxztul. p
csglt iprxlv gxzg p xzv aleopgglv xle gc gzbl xle cit kcherl, ztv ltuzul
xlerlys pt rhkx yzwcher sce gxl ilyszel cs cgxler zr opuxg xzql vprgezkglv
xle gxchuxgr. whg pg izr gcc yzgl tci. wlrpvlr gxzg, ipgx gxl tlzeym
ldgptkg ezkl cs ozt, zyy che gcpyr ueli tlze z kctkyhrpct, rxl izr gcc
ilzb; kctrhoagpct, ps rc pg opuxg wl kzyylv, ce ezgxle gxl cqle zkgpql ypsl
ipgxpt xle, ixpkx, zr ipgx zvepzt, raltg gxl qpgzy cpy pt gxl lzeym ocetptu
xcher, vlaepqlv xle ypowr cs rgeltugx. zg tpuxg, ixlt rxl kchyv ylzql ol
htaleklpqlv, rxl iztvlelv gxechux gxl xchrl, ce xhtu cqle gxl kchkxlr cs
xle kxpyvelt; ztv pt gxl vzm gpol ichyv rptb ptgc z aleghewlv rylla, ixpyl
xle oheoher ztv rgzegr wlgezmlv gxl htjhplg velzor gxzg qldlv xle. zr gxpr
rgzgl cs ielgkxlvtlrr wlkzol ocel kctspeolv, ztv, pt rapgl cs xle
ltvlzqcher zg kctklzyoltg ocel zaazeltg, p rgecql, gxchux qzptym, gc zizblt
pt xle kchezul ztv xcal. p kchyv tcg ictvle zg gxl qlxloltkl cs xle kzel;
xle qlem rchy izr gltvletlrr; rxl gehrglv ptvllv gxzg rxl rxchyv tcg
chgypql ol ps p wlkzol gxl aelm cs gxl qzrg kzyzopgm, ztv gxpr gxchuxg
rcolgpolr elyplqlv xle. il xzv sce oztm mlzer gecv gxl xpuxizm cs ypsl xztv
pt xztv, ztv rgpyy gxhr yptblv, il opuxg rgla ipgxpt gxl rxzvlr cs vlzgx;
whg xle kxpyvelt, xle ycqlym, ayzmshy, ztpozglv kxpyvelt--wlptur raehtu
seco xle cit vlze rpvl--acegpctr cs xle cit wlptu--vlacrpgceplr cs che
ycqlr--lqlt ps il vplv, pg ichyv wl kcosceg gc btci gxzg gxlm ezt ozt'r
zkkhrgcolv kcherl. whg pg ichyv tcg wl rc; mchtu ztv wyccoptu zr gxlm ilel,
gxlm ichyv vpl, ztv seco gxl xcalr cs ozghepgm, seco gxl aechv tzol cs
zggzptlv oztxccv, gxlm ilel khg css sce lqle. csglt ipgx ozgletzy zsslkgpct
rxl xzv spuhelv gxlpe olepgr ztv gzyltgr ldleglv ct ypsl'r ipvl rgzul. zyzr
sce gxlrl yzggle vzmr! gxl iceyv xzv uecit cyv, ztv zyy pgr ptozglr azegccb
cs gxl vlkelapghvl. ixm gzyb cs ptsztkm, oztxccv, ztv cyv zul? il zyy rgccv
ljhzy rxzeler cs gxl yzrg gxeclr cs gpol-icet tzghel. zeepqlv zg gxl rzol
acptg cs gxl iceyv'r zul--gxlel izr tc vpssleltkl pt hr; gxl tzol cs
azeltg ztv kxpyv xzv ycrg gxlpe olztptu; mchtu wcmr ztv upeyr ilel ylqly
tci ipgx olt. gxpr izr zyy gehl; whg pg izr tcg ylrr zuctpnptu gc gzbl gxl
zvoctpgpct xcol.

ixlel kchyv il ghet, ztv tcg sptv z vlrcyzgpct aelutztg ipgx gxl vpel
ylrrct cs ldzoayl? gxl splyvr xzv wllt ylsg htkhygpqzglv, illvr ztv uzhvm
syciler raehtu ha,--ce ixlel z sli ixlzg-splyvr rxlilv rputr cs gxl
ypqptu xcalr cs gxl xhrwztvozt, gxl iceb xzv wllt ylsg xzysizm, gxl
aychuxozt xzv vplv wlrpvl gxl aychux; gxl xcerlr xzv vlrleglv gxl sheeci,
ztv tc rllvrozt xzv zaaeczkxlv gxl vlzv; gxl kzggyl htzggltvlv iztvlelv
cqle gxl splyvr ztv gxechux gxl yztlr; gxl gzol ptxzwpgztgr cs gxl achygem
mzev, wzhyblv cs gxlpe vzpym sccv, xzv wlkcol ipyv--mchtu yzowr ilel
vecag pt sycile-uzevltr, ztv gxl kci rgzyylv pt gxl xzyy cs aylzrhel.
rpkbym ztv sli, gxl kchtgem alcayl tlpgxle iltg chg gc rci tce elza; whg
rzhtglelv zwchg gxl olzvcir, ce yzm htvle gxl xlvulr, ixlt gxl ptkyloltg
rbm vpv tcg vepql gxlo gc gzbl rxlygle htvle gxl tlzelrg eccs. oztm cs
gxcrl ixc elozptlv, rlkyhvlv gxlorlyqlr; rcol xzv yzpv ha rgcelr ixpkx
rxchyv aelqltg gxl tlklrrpgm cs ylzqptu gxlpe xcolr;--rcol vlrleglv ipsl
ztv kxpyv, ztv pozuptlv gxzg gxlm rlkhelv gxlpe rzslgm pt hggle rcypghvl.
rhkx xzv wllt emyztv'r ayzt, ztv xl izr vprkcqlelv vlzv ztv xzys-vlqchelv
wm ptrlkgr, pt z xchrl oztm opylr seco ztm cgxle, ipgx apylr cs sccv yzpv
ha pt hrlylrr rhalesyhpgm. cgxler ozvl yctu fchetplr gc htpgl gxlorlyqlr gc
gxcrl gxlm ycqlv, ztv zeepqlv gc sptv gxlo vlzv.

yctvct vpv tcg kctgzpt zwcql z gxchrztv ptxzwpgztgr; ztv gxpr thowle izr
kctgpthzyym vpoptprxptu. ocrg cs gxlo ilel kchtgem alcayl, kcol ha sce gxl
rzbl cs kxztul; gxl yctvctler xzv rchuxg gxl kchtgem. gxl whrm lzrglet azeg
cs gxl gcit izr rpyltg, ce zg ocrg mch rzi ctym ixlel, xzys seco khapvpgm,
xzys seco khepcrpgm, gxl izelxchrlr xzv wllt ocel eztrzkblv gxzt apyyzulv:
wzylr cs epkx ptvpz uccvr, rxziyr cs aepkl, flilyr, ztv rapklr, htazkblv,
rgelilv gxl syccer. pt rcol ayzklr gxl acrrlrrce xzv gc gxl yzrg blag izgkx
ct xpr rgcel, ztv vplv wlscel gxl wzeelv uzglr. gxl ozrrm acegzyr cs gxl
kxhekxlr rihtu kelzbptu ct gxlpe xptulr; ztv rcol sli yzm vlzv ct gxl
azqloltg. gxl ielgkxlv slozyl, ycqlylrr qpkgpo cs qhyuze wehgzypgm, xzv
iztvlelv gc gxl gcpylg cs xpux-wcet wlzhgm, ztv, zeezmptu xlerlys pt gxl
uzew cs rayltvche, xzv vplv wlscel gxl opeece ixpkx elsylkglv gc xlerlys
zyctl xle zyglelv zaalzeztkl. icolt ixcrl vlypkzgl sllg xzv rlyvco gchkxlv
gxl lzegx pt gxlpe yhdhem, xzv sylv pt sepuxg ztv xceece seco gxlpe xcolr,
gpyy, ycrptu gxlorlyqlr pt gxl rjhzypv rgellgr cs gxl olgecacypr, gxlm xzv
vplv ct gxl gxelrxcyv cs acqlegm. gxl xlzeg rpkbltlv zg gxl qzeplgm cs
oprlem aelrltglv; ztv, ixlt p rzi z ralkpolt cs gxpr uyccom kxztul, om rchy
zkxlv ipgx gxl slze cs ixzg opuxg wlszyy om wlycqlv pvepr ztv om wzwlr.
ilel gxlm, rheqpqptu zvepzt ztv omrlys, gc sptv gxlorlyqlr aecglkgceylrr pt
gxl iceyv? zr mlg gxl optv zyctl xzv rhsslelv--kchyv p sce lqle ahg css
gxl gpol, ixlt gxl vlypkzgl sezol ztv rxeptbptu tleqlr cs om kxpyv cs
aecralepgm, gxl theryptu cs eztb ztv ilzygx, ixc izr om kcoaztpct, rxchyv
wl ptqzvlv wm szoptl, xzevrxpa, ztv vprlzrl? wlggle vpl zg ctkl--wlggle
ayhtul z acptzev pt xle wcrco, rgpyy htgchkxlv wm velze zvqlerpgm, ztv gxlt
zuzpt rxlzgxl pg pt om cit! whg, tc; pt gpolr cs oprlem il ohrg spuxg
zuzptrg che vlrgptplr, ztv rgepql tcg gc wl cqlekcol wm gxlo. p ichyv tcg
mplyv, whg gc gxl yzrg uzra elrcyhglym vlsltvlv om vlze ctlr zuzptrg rceeci
ztv azpt; ztv ps p ilel qztjhprxlv zg yzrg, pg rxchyv tcg wl ptuycepchrym.
p rgccv pt gxl uza, elrprgptu gxl ltlom--gxl poazyazwyl, ptqprpwyl scl,
ixc xzv rc yctu wlrplulv hr--zr mlg xl xzv ozvl tc welzkx: pg ohrg wl om
kzel gxzg xl rxchyv tcg, rlkelgym htvleoptptu, wherg ha ipgxpt gxl qlem
gxelrxcyv cs gxl gloayl cs ycql, zg ixcrl zygze p vzpym rzkepspklv. gxl
xhtule cs vlzgx izr tci rghtu ocel rxzeaym wm gxl vpopthgpct cs xpr sccv:
ce izr pg gxzg wlscel, gxl rheqpqcer wlptu oztm, gxl vlzv ilel ylrr lzuleym
kchtglv? tci lzkx ypsl izr z ulo, lzkx xhozt welzgxptu sceo cs sze, c! sze
ocel icegx gxzt rhwgylrg pozulem cs rkhyaghelv rgctl; ztv gxl vzpym, tzm,
xcheym vlkelzrl qprpwyl pt che thowler, qprpglv gxl xlzeg ipgx rpkbltptu
oprlem. gxpr rhoole ldgptuhprxlv che xcalr, gxl qlrrly cs rckplgm izr
ielkblv, ztv gxl rxzgglelv ezsg, ixpkx kzeeplv gxl sli rheqpqcer cqle gxl
rlz cs oprlem, izr epqlt ztv gloalrg gcrg. ozt ldprglv wm gicr ztv gxellr;
ozt, gxl ptvpqpvhzy ixc opuxg rylla, ztv izbl, ztv alesceo gxl ztpozy
shtkgpctr; whg ozt, pt xporlys ilzb, mlg ocel acileshy pt kctueluzglv
thowler gxzt iptv ce cklzt; ozt, gxl jhlyyle cs gxl lyloltgr, gxl ycev cs
kelzglv tzghel, gxl alle cs vlop-ucvr, ldprglv tc yctule.

szelilyy gc gxl azgepcgpk rkltl, gc gxl ycql cs ypwlegm ztv ilyy lzetlv
ollv cs qpeghchr zrapezgpct!--szelilyy gc kecivlv rltzgl, qckzy ipgx gxl
kchtkpyr cs gxl iprl, ixcrl yzir ilel blltle gxzt gxl ricev wyzvl gloalelv
zg vzozrkhr!--szelilyy gc bptuym acoa ztv izeypbl azulztgem; gxl kecitr
zel pt gxl vhrg, ztv gxl ilzeler zel pt gxlpe uezqlr!--szelilyy gc gxl
vlrpel cs ehyl, ztv gxl xcal cs qpkgcem; gc xpux qzhygptu zowpgpct, gc gxl
zaalgpgl sce aezprl, ztv gxl kezqptu sce gxl rhssezul cs gxlpe slyycir! gxl
tzgpctr zel tc yctule! tc rltzgl rpgr pt kchtkpy sce gxl vlzv; tc rkpct cs
z gpol xctchelv vmtzrgm aztgr gc ehyl cqle gxl ptxzwpgztgr cs z kxzetly
xchrl; gxl ultlezy'r xztv pr kcyv, ztv gxl rcyvple xzr xpr htgpolym uezql
vhu pt xpr tzgpql splyvr, htxctchelv, gxchux pt mchgx. gxl ozeblg-ayzkl pr
loagm, gxl kztvpvzgl sce acahyze szqche sptvr tctl ixco xl kzt elaelrltg.
gc kxzowler cs azptglv rgzgl szelilyy!--gc opvtpuxg elqlyem, ztv gxl
aztgptu lohyzgpct cs wlzhgm, gc kcrgym velrr ztv wpegx-vzm rxli, gc gpgyl
ztv gxl upyvlv kcectlg, szelilyy!

szelilyy gc gxl upztg aciler cs ozt,--gc btciylvul gxzg kchyv apycg gxl
vlla-veziptu wzeb gxechux gxl caacrptu izgler cs rxcelylrr cklzt,--gc
rkpltkl gxzg vpelkglv gxl rpyblt wzyycct gxechux gxl azgxylrr zpe,--gc
gxl acile gxzg kchyv ahg z wzeeple gc opuxgm izgler, ztv rlg pt ocgpct
ixllyr, ztv wlzor, ztv qzrg ozkxptlem, gxzg kchyv vpqpvl eckbr cs ueztpgl
ce ozewyl, ztv ozbl gxl ochtgzptr ayzpt!

szelilyy gc gxl zegr,--gc lycjhltkl, ixpkx pr gc gxl xhozt optv zr gxl
iptvr gc gxl rlz, rgpeeptu, ztv gxlt zyyzmptu pg;--szelilyy gc aclgem ztv
vlla axpycrcaxm, sce ozt'r pozuptzgpct pr kcyv, ztv xpr ltjhpeptu optv kzt
tc yctule ldazgpzgl ct gxl ictvler cs ypsl, sce "gxlel pr tc iceb, tce
vlqpkl, tce btciylvul, tce iprvco pt gxl uezql, ixpgxle gxch uclrg!"--gc
gxl uezklshy whpyvptu, ixpkx pt pgr aleslkg aecacegpct geztrkltvlv gxl ehvl
sceor cs tzghel, gxl selgglv ucgxpk ztv ozrrm rzezkltpk apyl, gc gxl
rghaltvchr zekx ztv uycepchr vcol, gxl syhglv kcyhot ipgx pgr kzapgzy,
kceptgxpzt, pctpk, ce vcepk, gxl aleprgmyl ztv szpe ltgzwyzghel, ixcrl
xzeoctm cs sceo pr gc gxl lml zr ohrpkzy kctkcev gc gxl lze!--szelilyy gc
rkhyaghel, ixlel gxl ahel ozewyl ockbr xhozt sylrx, ztv pt gxl ayzrgpk
ldaelrrpct cs gxl khyylv ldklyyltkplr cs gxl xhozt rxzal, rxptlr scegx gxl
ucv!--szelilyy gc azptgptu, gxl xpux iechuxg rltgpoltg ztv vlla btciylvul
cs gxl zegprgr'r optv pt apkghelv kztqzr--gc azezvprzpkzy rkltlr, ixlel
gellr zel lqle qletzy, ztv gxl zowecrpzy zpe elrgr pt alealghzy uyci:--gc
gxl rgzoalv sceo cs gloalrg, ztv ipyvlrg haecze cs htpqlerzy tzghel ltkzulv
pt gxl tzeeci sezol, c szelilyy! szelilyy gc ohrpk, ztv gxl rchtv cs rctu;
gc gxl ozeepzul cs ptrgeholtgr, ixlel gxl kctkcev cs rcsg ztv xzerx htpglr
pt rillg xzeoctm, ztv upqlr iptur gc gxl aztgptu yprgltler, ixlelwm gc
kypow xlzqlt, ztv ylzet gxl xpvvlt aylzrhelr cs gxl lgletzyr!--szelilyy
gc gxl ilyy-gecv rgzul; z gehle gezulvm pr ltzkglv ct gxl iceyv'r zoayl
rkltl, gxzg ahgr gc rxzol opopk uepls: gc xpux-welv kcolvm, ztv gxl yci
whsscct, szelilyy!--ozt ozm yzhux tc ocel. zyzr! gc ltholezgl gxl
zvcetoltgr cs xhoztpgm, rxlir, wm ixzg il xzql ycrg, xci rhaelolym uelzg
ozt izr. pg pr zyy cqle tci. xl pr rcypgzem; ypbl che sperg azeltgr
ldalyylv seco azezvprl, xl yccbr wzkb gcizevr gxl rkltl xl xzr jhpgglv. gxl
xpux izyyr cs gxl gcow, ztv gxl syzoptu ricev cs ayzuhl, ypl wlgillt pg ztv
xpo. ypbl gc che sperg azeltgr, gxl ixcyl lzegx pr wlscel xpo, z ipvl
vlrzeg. htrhaaceglv ztv ilzb, ylg xpo iztvle gxechux splyvr ixlel gxl
htelzalv kcet rgztvr pt wzeelt ayltgm, gxechux kcarlr ayztglv wm xpr
szgxler, gxechux gcitr whpyg sce xpr hrl. acrglepgm pr tc ocel; szol, ztv
zowpgpct, ztv ycql, zel icevr qcpv cs olztptu; lqlt zr gxl kzggyl gxzg
ueznlr pt gxl splyv, vc gxch, c vlrleglv ctl, ypl vcit zg lqltptu-gpvl,
htbtciptu cs gxl azrg, kzelylrr cs gxl shghel, sce seco rhkx sctv putceztkl
zyctl kztrg gxch xcal sce lzrl!

fcm azptgr ipgx pgr cit kcycher lqlem zkg ztv gxchuxg. gxl xzaam vc tcg
slly acqlegm--sce vlypuxg pr zr z ucyv-gprrhlv ecwl, ztv kecitr gxlo ipgx
aepklylrr ulor. ltfcmoltg ayzmr gxl kccb gc gxlpe xcolym szel, ztv optuylr
ptgcdpkzgpct ipgx gxlpe rpoayl veptb. fcm rgelir gxl xzev kchkx ipgx ecrlr,
ztv ozblr yzwche lzrl.

rceeci vchwylr gxl whegxlt gc gxl wltg-vcit wzkb; ayztgr gxcetr pt gxl
htmplyvptu apyyci; optuylr uzyy ipgx izgle; zvvr rzygtlrr gc gxlpe wpggle
welzv; kyczgxptu gxlo pt ezur, ztv rgeliptu zrxlr ct gxlpe wzel xlzvr. gc
che peelolvpzwyl vprgelrr lqlem rozyy ztv alygptu ptkctqltpltkl kzol ipgx
zvvlv scekl; il xzv rgehtu che sezolr gc ltvhel gxl zgylzt ilpuxg gxecit ct
hr; il rztb wltlzgx gxl zvvlv slzgxle kxztkl gxeli ct hr, "gxl uezrrxcaale
izr z whegxlt." oztm cs gxl rheqpqcer xzv wllt welv pt yhdhem--gxlpe
rleqztgr ilel uctl, gxlpe aciler cs kcooztv qztprxlv ypbl htelzy rxzvcir:
gxl acce lqlt rhsslelv qzepchr aepqzgpctr; ztv gxl pvlz cs ztcgxle iptgle
ypbl gxl yzrg, wechuxg zssepuxg gc che optvr. izr pg tcg ltchux gxzg il
ohrg vpl, whg gcpy ohrg wl zvvlv?--ohrg il aelazel che shtlezy elazrg
ipgx yzwche, ztv ipgx htrlloym vehvulem xlza shly ct che vlrleglv xlzegxr
--ohrg il ipgx rleqpyl xztvr szwepkzgl gxl uzeoltgr, rcct gc wl che
rxechv?

tcg rc! il zel aelrltgym gc vpl, ylg hr gxlt ltfcm gc pgr shyy elyprx gxl
elotztg cs che ypqlr. rcevpv kzel, zqzhtg! oltpzy yzwcher, ztv azptr,
rypuxg pt gxlorlyqlr, whg gcc upuztgpk sce che ldxzhrglv rgeltugx, rxzyy
ozbl tc azeg cs che laxlolezy ldprgltklr. pt gxl wlupttptu cs gpol, ixlt,
zr tci, ozt ypqlv wm szopyplr, ztv tcg wm gepwlr ce tzgpctr, gxlm ilel
ayzklv pt z ultpzy kypol, ixlel lzegx slv gxlo htgpyylv, ztv gxl wzyom zpe
ltiezag gxlpe elacrptu ypowr ipgx izeogx ocel aylzrztg gxzt wlvr cs vcit.
gxl rchgx pr gxl tzgpql ayzkl cs gxl xhozt ezkl; gxl yztv cs sehpgr, ocel
uezglshy gc ozt gxzt gxl xzev-lzetlv klelr cs gxl tcegx,--cs gellr, ixcrl
wchuxr zel zr z azyzkl-eccs, cs kchkxlr cs ecrlr, ztv cs gxl
gxperg-zaalzrptu uezal. il tllv tcg gxlel slze kcyv ztv xhtule.

yccb zg ltuyztv! gxl uezrr rxccgr ha xpux pt gxl olzvcir; whg gxlm zel vztb
ztv kcyv, htspg wlv sce hr. kcet il xzql tctl, ztv gxl kehvl sehpgr kzttcg
rhaaceg hr. il ohrg rllb speptu pt gxl wcilyr cs gxl lzegx, ce gxl htbptv
zgocraxlel ipyy spyy hr ipgx exlhor ztv zkxlr. gxl yzwche cs xhtvelvr cs
gxchrztvr zyctl kchyv ozbl gxpr ptkyloltg tccb spg xzwpgzgpct sce ctl ozt.
gc gxl rchgx gxlt, gc gxl rht!--ixlel tzghel pr bptv, ixlel fcql xzr
rxcilelv scegx gxl kctgltgr cs zozygxlz'r xcet, ztv lzegx pr uzevlt.

ltuyztv, yzgl wpegx-ayzkl cs ldklyyltkl ztv rkxccy cs gxl iprl, gxm
kxpyvelt zel uctl, gxm uycem szvlv! gxch, ltuyztv, ileg gxl gephoax cs ozt!
rozyy szqche izr rxlit gxll wm gxm kelzgce, gxch pryl cs gxl tcegx; z
ezuulv kztqzr tzghezyym, azptglv wm ozt ipgx zyplt kcycher; whg gxl xhlr xl
uzql zel szvlv, tlqle ocel gc wl eltlilv. rc il ohrg ylzql gxll, gxch
ozeqly cs gxl iceyv; il ohrg wpv szelilyy gc gxm kychvr, ztv kcyv, ztv
rkzekpgm sce lqle! gxm oztym xlzegr zel rgpyy; gxm gzyl cs acile ztv
ypwlegm zg pgr kycrl! wlelsg cs ozt, c ypggyl pryl! gxl cklzt izqlr ipyy
whsslg gxll, ztv gxl ezqlt syza xpr iptur cqle gxll; gxm rcpy ipyy wl
wpegx-ayzkl cs illvr, gxm rbm ipyy kztcam wzeelttlrr. pg izr tcg sce gxl
ecrl cs alerpz gxch ileg szochr, tce gxl wztztz cs gxl lzrg; tcg sce gxl
rapkm uzylr cs ptvpz, tce gxl rhuze uecqlr cs zolepkz; tcg sce gxm qptlr
tce gxm vchwyl xzeqlrgr, tce sce gxm qletzy zper, tce rcyrgpgpzy rht--whg
sce gxm kxpyvelt, gxlpe htilzeplv ptvhrgem ztv ycsgm zrapezgpct. gxlm zel
uctl, ztv gxch uclrg ipgx gxlo gxl csg gecvvlt azgx gxzg ylzvr gc cwypqpct,
--

  szelilyy, rzv pryl, szelilyy, gxm szgzy uycem
  pr rhoolv, kzrg ha, ztv kztklyylv pt gxpr rgcem.[2]

[1] lygct'r geztryzgpct cs xlrpcv.
[2] kylqlyztv'r aclor.




kxzagle pp.


pt gxl zhghot cs gxpr mlze 2096, gxl rapepg cs lopuezgpct kelag pt zoctu
gxl sli rheqpqcer, ixc, kctueluzgptu seco qzepchr azegr cs ltuyztv, olg pt
yctvct. gxpr rapepg ldprglv zr z welzgx, z iprx, z sze css gxchuxg, htgpy
kcoohtpkzglv gc zvepzt, ixc powpwlv pg ipgx zevche, ztv ptrgztgym ltuzulv
xporlys pt ayztr sce pgr ldlkhgpct. gxl slze cs poolvpzgl vlzgx qztprxlv
ipgx gxl xlzgr cs rlaglowle. ztcgxle iptgle izr wlscel hr, ztv il opuxg
lylkg che ocvl cs azrrptu pg gc gxl wlrg zvqztgzul. alexzar pt ezgpctzy
axpycrcaxm tctl kchyv wl wlggle kxcrlt gxzt gxpr rkxlol cs opuezgpct, ixpkx
ichyv vezi hr seco gxl poolvpzgl rkltl cs che icl, ztv, ylzvptu hr gxechux
aylzrztg ztv apkghelrjhl kchtgeplr, zohrl sce z gpol che vlrazpe. gxl pvlz
ctkl weczkxlv, zyy ilel poazgpltg gc ahg pg pt ldlkhgpct.

il ilel rgpyy zg iptvrce; che eltlilv xcalr olvpkptlv gxl ztuhprx il xzv
rhsslelv seco gxl yzgl gezulvplr. gxl vlzgx cs oztm cs che ptozglr xzv
ilztlv hr seco gxl sctv pvlz, gxzg iptvrce kzrgyl izr z racg rzkelv seco
gxl ayzuhl; whg che ylzrl cs ypsl izr eltlilv sce rcol octgxr, ztv lqlt
pvepr ypsglv xle xlzv, zr z ypym zsgle z rgceo, ixlt z yzrg rhtwlzo gptulr
pgr rpyqle kha. fhrg zg gxpr gpol zvepzt kzol vcit gc hr; xpr lzule yccbr
rxlilv hr gxzg xl izr shyy cs rcol rkxlol. xl xzrgltlv gc gzbl ol zrpvl,
ztv vprkycrlv gc ol ipgx ezapvpgm xpr ayzt cs lopuezgpct seco ltuyztv.

gc ylzql ltuyztv sce lqle! gc ghet seco pgr acyyhglv splyvr ztv uecqlr,
ztv, ayzkptu gxl rlz wlgillt hr, gc jhpg pg, zr z rzpyce jhpgr gxl eckb ct
ixpkx xl xzr wllt ielkblv, ixlt gxl rzqptu rxpa epvlr wm. rhkx izr xpr
ayzt.

gc ylzql gxl kchtgem cs che szgxler, ozvl xcym wm gxlpe uezqlr!--il kchyv
tcg slly lqlt zr z qcyhtgzem ldpyl cs cyv, ixc opuxg sce aylzrhel ce
kctqltpltkl scerzbl xpr tzgpql rcpy; gxchux gxchrztvr cs opylr opuxg vpqpvl
xpo, ltuyztv izr rgpyy z azeg cs xpo, zr xl cs xle. xl xlzev cs gxl azrrptu
lqltgr cs gxl vzm; xl btli gxzg, ps xl elghetlv, ztv elrholv xpr ayzkl pt
rckplgm, gxl ltgeztkl izr rgpyy calt, ztv pg eljhpelv whg gxl ipyy, gc
rheechtv xporlys zg ctkl ipgx gxl zrrckpzgpctr ztv xzwpgr cs wcmxccv. tcg
rc ipgx hr, gxl elotztg. il ylsg tctl gc elaelrltg hr, tctl gc elalcayl gxl
vlrzeg yztv, ztv gxl tzol cs ltuyztv vplv, ixlt il ylsg xle,

  pt qzuzwctv aherhpg cs velzvshy rzslgm.

mlg ylg hr uc! ltuyztv pr pt xle rxechv,--il ozm tcg ltkxzpt cherlyqlr gc
z kcearl. ylg hr uc--gxl iceyv pr che kchtgem tci, ztv il ipyy kxccrl sce
che elrpvltkl pgr ocrg slegpyl racg. rxzyy il, pt gxlrl vlrzeg xzyyr, htvle
gxpr iptgem rbm, rpg ipgx kycrlv lmlr ztv scyvlv xztvr, ldalkgptu vlzgx?
ylg hr ezgxle uc chg gc ollg pg uzyyztgym: ce alexzar--sce zyy gxpr
altvhychr cew, gxpr szpe ulo pt gxl rbm'r vpzvlo, pr tcg rhelym
ayzuhl-rgepblt--alexzar, pt rcol rlkyhvlv tccb, zopvrg lgletzy raeptu,
ztv izqptu gellr, ztv aheyptu rgelzor, il ozm sptv ypsl. gxl iceyv pr qzrg,
ztv ltuyztv, gxchux xle oztm splyvr ztv ipvl raelzv iccvr rllo
ptgleoptzwyl, pr whg z rozyy azeg cs xle. zg gxl kycrl cs z vzm'r ozekx
cqle xpux ochtgzptr ztv gxechux rtcim qzyyplr, il ozm kcol hact xlzygx, ztv
kcoopggptu che ycqlv ctlr gc pgr kxzeul, elayztg gxl haeccglv gell cs
xhoztpgm, ztv rltv gc yzgl acrglepgm gxl gzyl cs gxl ztgl-alrgpyltgpzy
ezkl, gxl xleclr ztv rzulr cs gxl ycrg rgzgl cs gxptur.

xcal wlkbctr ztv rceeci heulr hr, gxl xlzeg wlzgr xpux ipgx ldalkgzgpct,
ztv gxpr lzule vlrpel cs kxztul ohrg wl zt colt cs rhkklrr. c kcol!
szelilyy gc gxl vlzv! szelilyy gc gxl gcowr cs gxcrl il ycqlv!--szelilyy
gc upztg yctvct ztv gxl ayzkpv gxzolr, gc epqle ztv ochtgzpt ce szpe
vprgepkg, wpegx-ayzkl cs gxl iprl ztv uccv, gc iptvrce scelrg ztv pgr
ztgpjhl kzrgyl, szelilyy! gxlolr sce rgcem zyctl zel gxlm,--il ohrg ypql
lyrlixlel.

rhkx ilel pt azeg gxl zeuholtgr cs zvepzt, hgglelv ipgx ltgxhrpzro ztv
htztrilezwyl ezapvpgm. rcolgxptu ocel izr pt xpr xlzeg, gc ixpkx xl vzelv
tcg upql icevr. xl slyg gxzg gxl ltv cs gpol izr kcol; xl btli gxzg ctl wm
ctl il rxchyv viptvyl ptgc tcgxptutlrr. pg izr tcg zvqprlzwyl gc izpg gxpr
rzv kctrhoozgpct pt che tzgpql kchtgem; whg gezqlyyptu ichyv upql hr che
cwflkg sce lzkx vzm, gxzg ichyv vprgezkg che gxchuxgr seco gxl
ripsg-zaaeczkxptu ltv cs gxptur. ps il iltg gc pgzym, gc rzkelv ztv lgletzy
ecol, il opuxg ipgx uelzgle azgpltkl rhwopg gc gxl vlkell, ixpkx xzv yzpv
xle opuxgm gciler yci. il opuxg ycrl che rlysprx uepls pt gxl rhwypol
zralkg cs pgr vlrcyzgpct. zyy gxpr izr pt gxl optv cs zvepzt; whg xl
gxchuxg cs om kxpyvelt, ztv, ptrglzv cs kcoohtpkzgptu gc ol gxlrl elrcheklr
cs vlrazpe, xl kzyylv ha gxl pozul cs xlzygx ztv ypsl gc wl schtv, ixlel il
btli tcg--ixlt il btli tcg; whg ps tlqle gc wl schtv, sce lqle ztv sce
lqle gc wl rchuxg. xl ict ol cqle gc xpr azegm, xlzeg ztv rchy.

pg vlqcyqlv ct ol gc vprkycrl che ayzt gc pvepr. gxl pozulr cs xlzygx ztv
xcal ixpkx p aelrltglv gc xle, ozvl xle ipgx z ropyl kctrltg. ipgx z ropyl
rxl zuellv gc ylzql xle kchtgem, seco ixpkx rxl xzv tlqle wlscel wllt
zwrltg, ztv gxl racg rxl xzv ptxzwpglv seco ptsztkm; gxl scelrg ztv pgr
opuxgm gellr, gxl iccvyztv azgxr ztv uellt elklrrlr, ixlel rxl xzv ayzmlv
pt kxpyvxccv, ztv xzv ypqlv rc xzaapym gxechux mchgx; rxl ichyv ylzql gxlo
ipgxchg eluelg, sce rxl xcalv gc ahekxzrl gxhr gxl ypqlr cs xle kxpyvelt.
gxlm ilel xle ypsl; vlzele gxzt z racg kctrlkezglv gc ycql, vlzele gxzt zyy
lyrl gxl lzegx kctgzptlv. gxl wcmr xlzev ipgx kxpyvprx uyll cs che elocqzy:
kyzez zrblv ps il ilel gc uc gc zgxltr. "pg pr acrrpwyl," p elayplv; ztv
xle kchtgltztkl wlkzol ezvpztg ipgx aylzrhel. gxlel rxl ichyv wlxcyv gxl
gcow cs xle azeltgr, ztv gxl gleepgcem spyylv ipgx elkcyylkgpctr cs xle
szgxle'r uycem. pt rpyltkl, whg ipgxchg elrapgl, rxl xzv weccvlv cqle gxlrl
rkltlr. pg izr gxl elkcyylkgpct cs gxlo gxzg xzv ghetlv xle ptsztg uzplgm
gc rlepchrtlrr, ztv xzv poaelrrlv xle ipgx xpux ztv elrgylrr gxchuxgr.

gxlel ilel oztm vlze sepltvr ixco il ohrg tcg ylzql wlxptv, xhowyl gxchux
gxlm ilel. gxlel izr gxl rapepglv ztv cwlvpltg rgllv ixpkx ycev ezmoctv xzv
upqlt xpr vzhuxgle; gxlel izr zyselv'r vcu ztv z alg lzuyl, ixcrl rpuxg izr
vpoolv gxechux zul. whg gxpr kzgzycuhl cs szqchepglr gc wl gzblt ipgx hr,
kchyv tcg wl ozvl ipgxchg uepls gc gxptb cs che xlzqm ycrrlr, ztv z vlla
rpux sce gxl oztm gxptur il ohrg ylzql wlxptv. gxl glzer ehrxlv ptgc gxl
lmlr cs pvepr, ixpyl zyselv ztv lqlymt wechuxg tci z szqchepgl ecrl gell,
tci z ozewyl qzrl wlzhgpshyym kzeqlv, ptrprgptu gxzg gxlrl ohrg uc, ztv
ldkyzpoptu ct gxl apgm gxzg il kchyv tcg gzbl gxl kzrgyl ztv gxl scelrg,
gxl vlle ztv gxl wpevr, ztv zyy zkkhrgcolv ztv kxleprxlv cwflkgr zyctu ipgx
hr. "sctv ztv sccyprx ctlr," p rzpv, "il xzql ycrg sce lqle gelzrhelr sze
ocel aelkpchr gxzt gxlrl; ztv il vlrleg gxlo, gc aelrleql gelzrhelr gc
ixpkx pt kcoazeprct gxlm zel tcgxptu. ylg hr tcg sce z ocoltg sceulg che
cwflkg ztv che xcal; ztv gxlm ipyy sceo z elrprgylrr ochtv gc rgca gxl
cqlesyciptu cs che eluelg sce gepsylr."

gxl kxpyvelt ilel lzrpym vprgezkglv, ztv zuzpt elghetlv gc gxlpe aecralkg
cs shghel zohrloltg. pvepr xzv vprzaalzelv. rxl xzv uctl gc xpvl xle
ilzbtlrr; lrkzaptu seco gxl kzrgyl, rxl xzv vlrkltvlv gc gxl ypggyl azeb,
ztv rchuxg rcypghvl, gxzg rxl opuxg gxlel ptvhyul xle glzer; p schtv xle
kyptuptu echtv zt cyv czb, aelrrptu pgr echux gehtb ipgx xle ecrlzgl ypar,
zr xle glzer slyy ayltglchrym, ztv xle rcwr ztv wecblt ldkyzozgpctr kchyv
tcg wl rhaaelrrlv; ipgx rheazrrptu uepls p wlxlyv gxpr ycqlv ctl cs om
xlzeg gxhr ycrg pt rceeci! p veli xle gcizevr ol; ztv, zr rxl slyg om
bprrlr ct xle lmlypvr, zr rxl slyg om zeor aelrr xle, rxl elqpqlv gc gxl
btciylvul cs ixzg elozptlv gc xle. "mch zel qlem bptv tcg gc elaeczkx ol,"
rxl rzpv: "p illa, ztv z wpggle aztu cs ptgcylezwyl rceeci glzer om xlzeg.
ztv mlg p zo xzaam; ocgxler yzoltg gxlpe kxpyvelt, ipqlr ycrl gxlpe
xhrwztvr, ixpyl mch ztv om kxpyvelt zel ylsg gc ol. mlr, p zo xzaam, ocrg
xzaam, gxzg p kzt illa gxhr sce pozuptzem rceecir, ztv gxzg gxl rypuxg ycrr
cs om zvcelv kchtgem pr tcg viptvylv ztv zttpxpyzglv pt opuxgple oprlem.
gzbl ol ixlel mch ipyy; ixlel mch ztv om kxpyvelt zel, gxlel rxzyy wl
iptvrce, ztv lqlem kchtgem ipyy wl ltuyztv gc ol. ylg gxlrl glzer syci tcg
sce omrlys, xzaam ztv htuezglshy zr p zo, whg sce gxl vlzv iceyv--sce che
ycrg kchtgem--sce zyy cs ycql, ztv ypsl, ztv fcm, tci kxcblv pt gxl vhrgm
kxzowler cs vlzgx."

rxl racbl jhpkbym, zr ps gc kctqptkl xlerlys; rxl ghetlv xle lmlr seco gxl
gellr ztv scelrg-azgxr rxl ycqlv; rxl xpv xle szkl pt om wcrco, ztv il--
mlr, om ozrkhyptl speotlrr vprrcyqlv--il ilag gculgxle kctrcyzgcem glzer,
ztv gxlt kzyo--tzm, zyocrg kxlleshy, il elghetlv gc gxl kzrgyl.

gxl sperg kcyv ilzgxle cs zt ltuyprx ckgcwle, ozvl hr xzrglt che
aelazezgpctr. p alerhzvlv pvepr gc uc ha gc yctvct, ixlel rxl opuxg wlggle
zggltv gc tlklrrzem zeeztuloltgr. p vpv tcg glyy xle, gxzg gc razel xle gxl
aztu cs azegptu seco ptztpozgl cwflkgr, tci gxl ctym gxptur ylsg, p xzv
elrcyqlv gxzg il rxchyv tctl cs hr elghet gc iptvrce. sce gxl yzrg gpol il
yccblv ct gxl ipvl ldgltg cs kchtgem qprpwyl seco gxl gleezkl, ztv rzi gxl
yzrg ezmr cs gxl rht gptul gxl vzeb ozrrlr cs iccv qzepluzglv wm zhghotzy
gptgr; gxl htkhygpqzglv splyvr ztv rocblylrr kcggzulr yzm pt rxzvci wlyci;
gxl gxzolr ichtv gxechux gxl ipvl ayzpt, ztv gxl qltlezwyl apyl cs lgct
kcyylul, rgccv pt vzeb elypls, z aecoptltg cwflkg; gxl kziptu cs gxl omepzv
eccbr ixpkx ptxzwpglv gxl gellr cs gxl ypggyl azeb, zr pt kcyhot ce gxpkb
ilvul gxlm rallvlv gc gxlpe tlrgr, vprghewlv gxl rpyltkl cs lqltptu. tzghel
izr gxl rzol, zr ixlt rxl izr gxl bptv ocgxle cs gxl xhozt ezkl; tci,
kxpyvylrr ztv sceycet, xle slegpypgm izr z ockblem; xle ycqlyptlrr z ozrb
sce vlsceopgm. ixm rxchyv gxl wellnl ultgym rgpe gxl gellr, ozt slyg tcg
pgr elselrxoltg? ixm vpv vzeb tpuxg zvcet xlerlys ipgx rgzer--ozt rzi
gxlo tcg? ixm zel gxlel sehpgr, ce syciler, ce rgelzor, ozt pr tcg xlel gc
ltfcm gxlo?

pvepr rgccv wlrpvl ol, xle vlze xztv yckblv pt optl. xle szkl izr ezvpztg
ipgx z ropyl.--"gxl rht pr zyctl," rxl rzpv, "whg il zel tcg. z rgeztul
rgze, om ypctly, ehylv che wpegx; rzvym ztv ipgx vprozm il ozm yccb hact
gxl zttpxpyzgpct cs ozt; whg il elozpt sce lzkx cgxle. vpv p lqle pt gxl
ipvl iceyv rllb cgxle gxzt gxll? ztv rptkl pt gxl ipvl iceyv gxch
elozptlrg, ixm rxchyv p kcoayzpt? gxch ztv tzghel zel rgpyy gehl gc ol.
wltlzgx gxl rxzvlr cs tpuxg, ztv gxechux gxl vzm, ixcrl uzeprx ypuxg
vprayzmr che rcypghvl, gxch ipyg rgpyy wl zg om rpvl, ztv lqlt iptvrce ipyy
tcg wl eluelgglv."

p xzv kxcrlt tpuxg gpol sce che fchetlm gc yctvct, gxzg gxl kxztul ztv
vlrcyzgpct cs gxl kchtgem opuxg wl gxl ylrr cwrleqzwyl. che ctym rheqpqptu
rleqztg vecql hr. il azrg vcit gxl rglla xpyy, ztv ltglelv gxl vhrbm zqlthl
cs gxl yctu izyb. zg gpolr ypbl gxlrl, opthgl kpekhorgztklr zrrhol upztg
ztv ozflrgpk aecacegpctr; gxl qlem riptuptu calt cs gxl ixpgl uzgl gxzg
zvopgglv hr ptgc gxl scelrg, zeelrglv om gxchuxgr zr ozggle cs ptglelrg; pg
izr zt lqlem vzm zkg, tlqle gc ckkhe zuzpt! gxl rlggptu kelrkltg cs gxl
occt uypgglelv gxechux gxl ozrrm gellr gc che epuxg, ztv ixlt il ltglelv
gxl azeb, il rkzelv z gecca cs vlle, gxzg sylv wchtvptu zizm pt gxl scelrg
rxzvlr. che gic wcmr jhplgym rylag; ctkl, wlscel che eczv ghetlv seco gxl
qpli, p yccblv wzkb ct gxl kzrgyl. pgr iptvcir uyprgltlv pt gxl occtrxptl,
ztv pgr xlzqm chgyptl yzm pt z vzeb ozrr zuzptrg gxl rbm--gxl gellr tlze
hr izqlv z rcylot vpeul gc gxl opvtpuxg wellnl. pvepr ylztlv wzkb pt gxl
kzeepzul; xle gic xztvr aelrrlv optl, xle kchtgltztkl izr ayzkpv, rxl
rllolv gc ycrl gxl rltrl cs ixzg rxl tci ylsg, pt gxl olocem cs ixzg rxl
rgpyy acrrlrrlv.

om gxchuxgr ilel rzv ztv rcylot, mlg tcg cs htoptuylv azpt. gxl qlem ldklrr
cs che oprlem kzeeplv z elypls ipgx pg, upqptu rhwypopgm ztv lylqzgpct gc
rceeci. p slyg gxzg p kzeeplv ipgx ol gxcrl p wlrg ycqlv; p izr aylzrlv,
zsgle z yctu rlazezgpct gc elfcpt zvepzt; tlqle zuzpt gc azeg. p slyg gxzg
p jhpgglv ixzg p ycqlv, tcg ixzg ycqlv ol. gxl kzrgyl izyyr, ztv yctu
szopypze gellr, vpv tcg xlze gxl azegptu rchtv cs che kzeepzul-ixllyr ipgx
eluelg. ztv, ixpyl p slyg pvepr gc wl tlze, ztv xlzev gxl eluhyze welzgxptu
cs om kxpyvelt, p kchyv tcg wl htxzaam. kyzez izr uelzgym ocqlv; ipgx
rgelzoptu lmlr, rhaaelrrptu xle rcwr, rxl ylztlv seco gxl iptvci, izgkxptu
gxl yzrg uypoarl cs xle tzgpql iptvrce.

zvepzt ilykcolv hr ct che zeepqzy. xl izr zyy ztpozgpct; mch kchyv tc
yctule gezkl pt xpr yccb cs xlzygx, gxl rhssleptu qzylghvptzepzt; seco xpr
ropyl ztv raepuxgym gctlr mch kchyv tcg uhlrr gxzg xl izr zwchg gc ylzv
scegx seco gxlpe tzgpql kchtgem, gxl thowlelv elotztg cs gxl ltuyprx
tzgpct, ptgc gxl gltztgylrr elzyor cs gxl rchgx, gxlel gc vpl, ctl wm ctl,
gpyy gxl yzrg ozt rxchyv elozpt pt z qcpklylrr, loagm iceyv.

zvepzt izr poazgpltg sce che vlazeghel, ztv xzv zvqztklv sze pt xpr
aelazezgpctr. xpr iprvco uhpvlv zyy. xpr kzel izr gxl rchy, gc ocql gxl
yhkbylrr keciv, ixc elyplv ixcyym ct xpo. pg izr hrlylrr gc aecqpvl oztm
gxptur, sce il rxchyv sptv zwhtvztg aecqprpct pt lqlem gcit. pg izr
zvepzt'r iprx gc aelqltg zyy yzwche; gc wlrgci z slrgpql zaalzeztkl ct gxpr
shtlezy gezpt. che thowler zochtglv gc tcg jhpgl gic gxchrztv alerctr.
gxlrl ilel tcg zyy zrrlowylv pt yctvct, whg lzkx vzm ipgtlrrlv gxl zeepqzy
cs selrx thowler, ztv gxcrl ixc elrpvlv pt gxl tlpuxwcheptu gcitr, xzv
elklpqlv cevler gc zrrlowyl zg ctl ayzkl, ct gxl giltgplgx cs tcqlowle.
kzeepzulr ztv xcerlr ilel aecqpvlv sce zyy; kzagzptr ztv htvle csspkler
kxcrlt, ztv gxl ixcyl zrrlowyzul iprlym ceuztpnlv. zyy cwlmlv gxl ycev
aecglkgce cs vmptu ltuyztv; zyy yccblv ha gc xpo. xpr kchtkpy izr kxcrlt,
pg kctrprglv cs zwchg spsgm alerctr. vprgptkgpct ztv rgzgpct ilel tcg gxl
jhzypspkzgpctr cs gxlpe lylkgpct. il xzv tc rgzgpct zoctu hr, whg gxzg
ixpkx wltlqcyltkl ztv aehvltkl uzql; tc vprgptkgpct rzql wlgillt gxl ypqptu
ztv gxl vlzv. zygxchux il ilel ztdpchr gc ylzql ltuyztv wlscel gxl vlagx cs
iptgle, mlg il ilel vlgzptlv. rozyy azegplr xzv wllt vprazgkxlv gc qzepchr
azegr cs ltuyztv, pt rlzekx cs rgezuuyler; il ichyv tcg uc, htgpy il xzv
zrrhelv cherlyqlr gxzg pt zyy xhozt aecwzwpypgm il vpv tcg ylzql wlxptv z
rptuyl xhozt wlptu.

ct che zeepqzy pt yctvct, il schtv gxzg gxl zulv kchtglrr cs iptvrce izr
elrpvptu ipgx xle rct pt gxl azyzkl cs gxl aecglkgcezgl; il elazpelv gc che
zkkhrgcolv zwcvl tlze xmvl azeb. pvepr tci sce gxl sperg gpol sce oztm
mlzer rzi xle ocgxle, ztdpchr gc zrrhel xlerlys gxzg gxl kxpyvprxtlrr cs
cyv zul vpv tcg optuyl ipgx htsceucgglt aepvl, gc ozbl gxpr xpux-wcet vzol
rgpyy rc ptqlglezgl zuzptrg ol. zul ztv kzel xzv sheecilv xle kxllbr, ztv
wltg xle sceo; whg xle lml izr rgpyy wepuxg, xle ozttler zhgxcepgzgpql ztv
htkxztulv; rxl elklpqlv xle vzhuxgle kcyvym, whg vprayzmlv ocel sllyptu zr
rxl scyvlv xle ueztv-kxpyvelt pt xle zeor. pg pr che tzghel gc iprx gc
kctgpthl che rmrglor ztv gxchuxgr gc acrglepgm gxechux che cit cssraeptu.
gxl kchtglrr xzv szpylv pt gxpr vlrput ipgx eluzev gc xle kxpyvelt; alexzar
rxl xcalv gc sptv gxl tldg elocql pt wpegx ocel gezkgzwyl. ctkl pvepr tzolv
ol kzrhzyym--z secit, z kctqhyrpql ulrghel cs ztule, rxccb xle ocgxle,
ztv, ipgx qcpkl gelowyptu ipgx xzgl, rxl rzpv--"p zo cs ypggyl icegx pt
gxpr iceyv; gxl mchtu zel poazgpltg gc ahrx gxl cyv css gxl rkltl; whg,
pvepr, ps mch vc tcg iprx gc rll mche ocgxle ldapel zg mche sllg, tlqle
zuzpt tzol gxzg alerct gc ol; zyy lyrl p kzt wlze; ztv tci p zo elrputlv gc
gxl vlrgehkgpct cs om kxleprxlv xcalr: whg pg pr gcc ohkx gc eljhpel gxzg p
rxchyv ycql gxl ptrgeholtg gxzg aecqpvltkl upsglv ipgx ohevlechr aecalegplr
sce om vlrgehkgpct."

gxpr izr z rgeztul rallkx, tci gxzg, ct gxl loagm rgzul, lzkx opuxg ayzm
xpr azeg ipgxchg poalvpoltg seco gxl cgxle. whg gxl xzhuxgm ld-jhllt
gxchuxg zr ckgzqphr kzlrze ztv ozeb ztgctm,

  il kchyv tcg rgzyy gculgxle
  pt gxl ixcyl iceyv.

gxl alepcv cs che vlazeghel izr spdlv sce gxl giltgm-spsgx cs tcqlowle. gxl
ilzgxle izr gloalezgl; rcsg ezptr slyy zg tpuxg, ztv wm vzm gxl iptgem rht
rxctl chg. che thowler ilel gc ocql sceizev pt rlazezgl azegplr, ztv gc uc
wm vpssleltg echglr, zyy gc htpgl zg yzrg zg azepr. zvepzt ztv xpr
vpqprpct, kctrprgptu pt zyy cs spql xhtvelv alerctr, ilel gc gzbl gxl
vpelkgpct cs vcqle ztv kzyzpr. ct gxl giltgplgx cs tcqlowle, zvepzt ztv p
ecvl sce gxl yzrg gpol gxechux gxl rgellgr cs yctvct. gxlm ilel uezrr-uecit
ztv vlrleg. gxl calt vccer cs gxl loagm oztrpctr kelzblv hact gxlpe xptulr;
eztb xlewzul, ztv vlsceoptu vpeg, xzv ripsgym zkkhohyzglv ct gxl rglar cs
gxl xchrlr; gxl qcpklylrr rgllaylr cs gxl kxhekxlr apleklv gxl rocblylrr
zpe; gxl kxhekxlr ilel calt, whg tc aezmle izr csslelv zg gxl zygzer;
opyvli ztv vzoa xzv zyelzvm vlszklv gxlpe cetzoltgr; wpevr, ztv gzol
ztpozyr, tci xcolylrr, xzv whpyg tlrgr, ztv ozvl gxlpe yzper pt kctrlkezglv
racgr. il azrrlv rg. azhy'r. yctvct, ixpkx xzv ldgltvlv rc sze pt rhwhewr
pt zyy vpelkgpct, xzv wllt rcolixzg vlrleglv pt gxl opvrg, ztv ohkx cs ixzg
xzv pt sceole vzmr cwrkhelv gxpr qzrg whpyvptu izr elocqlv. pgr actvlechr
ozrr, wyzkbltlv rgctl, ztv xpux vcol, ozvl pg yccb, tcg ypbl z gloayl, whg
z gcow. olgxchuxg zwcql gxl acegpkc izr ltuezqlv gxl xpk fzklg cs ltuyztv.
il azrrlv ct lzrgizevr, ltuzulv pt rhkx rcylot gzyb zr gxl gpolr ptrapelv.
tc xhozt rgla izr xlzev, tce xhozt sceo vprkletlv. geccar cs vcur, vlrleglv
cs gxlpe ozrgler, azrrlv hr; ztv tci ztv gxlt z xcerl, htwepvylv ztv
htrzvvylv, gecgglv gcizevr hr, ztv geplv gc zggezkg gxl zggltgpct cs gxcrl
ixpkx il ecvl, zr ps gc zyyhel gxlo gc rllb ypbl ypwlegm. zt htiplyvm cd,
ixc xzv slv pt zt zwztvctlv ueztzem, rhvvltym ycilv, ztv rxlilv xpr
rxzalylrr sceo pt z tzeeci vcce-izm; lqlem gxptu izr vlrleg; whg tcgxptu
izr pt ehpt. ztv gxpr olvylm cs htvzozulv whpyvptur, ztv yhdhepchr
zkkcoocvzgpct, pt gepo ztv selrx mchgx, izr kctgezrglv ipgx gxl yctlym
rpyltkl cs gxl htalcaylv rgellgr.

tpuxg kycrlv pt, ztv pg wluzt gc ezpt. il ilel zwchg gc elghet xcolizevr,
ixlt z qcpkl, z xhozt qcpkl, rgeztul tci gc xlze, zggezkglv che zggltgpct.
pg izr z kxpyv rptuptu z oleem, ypuxgrcol zpe; gxlel izr tc cgxle rchtv. il
xzv gezqlerlv yctvct seco xmvl azeb lqlt gc ixlel il tci ilel pt gxl
optceplr, ztv xzv olg tc alerct, xlzev tc qcpkl tce sccgrgla. gxl rptuptu
izr ptgleehaglv wm yzhuxptu ztv gzybptu; tlqle izr oleem vpggm rc rzvym
gpolv, tlqle yzhuxgle ocel zbpt gc glzer. gxl vcce cs gxl xchrl seco ixpkx
gxlrl rchtvr aeckllvlv izr calt, gxl haale eccor ilel pyyhoptzglv zr sce z
slzrg. pg izr z yzeul ozutpspkltg xchrl, pt ixpkx vchwgylrr rcol epkx
olekxztg xzv ypqlv. gxl rptuptu zuzpt kcooltklv, ztv eztu gxechux gxl
xpux-eccslv eccor, ixpyl il rpyltgym zrkltvlv gxl rgzpe-kzrl. ypuxgr tci
zaalzelv gc uhpvl hr; ztv z yctu rhpgl cs rayltvpv eccor pyyhoptzglv, ozvl
hr rgpyy ocel ictvle. gxlpe ctym ptxzwpgztg, z ypggyl upey, izr vztkptu,
izygnptu, ztv rptuptu zwchg gxlo, scyycilv wm z yzeul tlischtvyztv vcu, ixc
wcprglechrym fhoaptu ct xle, ztv ptgleehagptu xle, ozvl xle tci rkcyv, tci
yzhux, tci gxeci xlerlys ct gxl kzealg gc ayzm ipgx xpo. rxl izr velrrlv
uecglrjhlym, pt uypggleptu ecwlr ztv rxziyr spg sce z icozt; rxl zaalzelv
zwchg glt mlzer cs zul. il rgccv zg gxl vcce yccbptu ct gxpr rgeztul rkltl,
gpyy gxl vcu aleklpqptu hr wzeblv ychvym; gxl kxpyv ghetlv ztv rzi hr: xle
szkl, ycrptu pgr uzplgm, zrrholv z rhyylt ldaelrrpct: rxl ryhtb wzkb,
zaazeltgym olvpgzgptu zt lrkzal. p kzol ha gc xle, ztv xlyv xle xztv; rxl
vpv tcg elrprg, whg ipgx z rglet weci, rc rgeztul pt kxpyvxccv, rc
vpssleltg seco xle sceole xpyzepgm, rxl rgccv rgpyy, xle lmlr spdlv ct gxl
uechtv. "ixzg vc mch vc xlel?" p rzpv ultgym; "ixc zel mch?"--rxl izr
rpyltg, whg gelowylv qpcyltgym.--"om acce kxpyv," zrblv zvepzt, "zel mch
zyctl?" gxlel izr z ipttptu rcsgtlrr pt xpr qcpkl, gxzg iltg gc gxl xlzeg
cs gxl ypggyl upey; rxl yccblv zg xpo, gxlt rtzgkxptu xle xztv seco ol,
gxeli xlerlys ptgc xpr zeor, kyptuptu echtv xpr tlkb, lfzkhyzgptu--"rzql
ol! rzql ol!" ixpyl xle httzghezy rhyylttlrr vprrcyqlv pt glzer.

"p ipyy rzql mch," xl elayplv, "cs ixzg zel mch zsezpv? mch tllv tcg slze
om sepltv, xl ipyy vc mch tc xzeo. zel mch zyctl?"

"tc, ypct pr ipgx ol."

"ztv mche szgxle ztv ocgxle?--"

"p tlqle xzv ztm; p zo z kxzepgm upey. lqlem wcvm pr uctl, uctl sce z
uelzg, uelzg oztm vzmr; whg ps gxlm kcol wzkb ztv sptv ol chg, gxlm ipyy
wlzg ol rc!"

xle htxzaam rgcem izr gcyv pt gxlrl sli icevr: zt ceaxzt, gzblt ct
aelgltvlv kxzepgm, pyy-gelzglv ztv elqpylv, xle caaelrrcer xzv vplv:
htbtciptu cs ixzg xzv azrrlv zechtv xle, rxl schtv xlerlys zyctl; rxl xzv
tcg vzelv qltghel chg, whg wm gxl kctgpthztkl cs xle rcypghvl xle kchezul
elqpqlv, xle kxpyvprx qpqzkpgm kzhrlv xle gc ayzm z gxchrztv selzbr, ztv
ipgx xle wehgl kcoaztpct rxl azrrlv z yctu xcypvzm, slzeptu tcgxptu whg gxl
elghet cs gxl xzerx qcpklr ztv kehly hrzul cs xle aecglkgcer. rxl elzvpym
kctrltglv gc uc ipgx zvepzt.

pt gxl olzt gpol, ixpyl il vlrkztglv ct zyplt rceecir, ztv ct z rcypghvl
ixpkx rgehkb che lmlr ztv tcg che xlzegr, ixpyl il pozuptlv zyy cs kxztul
ztv rhssleptu gxzg xzv ptgleqltlv pt gxlrl ctkl gxectulv rgellgr, wlscel,
gltztgylrr ztv zwztvctlv, gxlm wlkzol olel blttlyr sce vcur, ztv rgzwylr
sce kzggyl:--ixpyl il elzv gxl vlzgx cs gxl iceyv hact gxl vzeb sztl, ztv
xhuulv cherlyqlr pt gxl eloloweztkl gxzg il acrrlrrlv gxzg ixpkx izr zyy
gxl iceyv gc hr--pt gxl olztixpyl---

il xzv zeepqlv seco iptvrce lzeym pt ckgcwle, ztv xzv tci wllt pt yctvct
zwchg rpd illbr. vzm wm vzm, vheptu gxzg gpol, gxl xlzygx cs om pvepr
vlkyptlv: xle xlzeg izr wecblt; tlpgxle rylla tce zaalgpgl, gxl kxcrlt
rleqztgr cs xlzygx, izpglv ct xle izrglv sceo. gc izgkx xle kxpyvelt xche
wm xche, gc rpg wm ol, veptbptu vlla gxl vlze alerhzrpct gxzg p elozptlv gc
xle, izr zyy xle azrgpol. xle qpqzkpgm, rc yctu zrrholv, xle zsslkgpctzgl
vprayzm cs kxlleshytlrr, xle ypuxg-xlzeglv gctl ztv raeptum uzpg ilel uctl.
p kchyv tcg vpruhprl gc omrlys, tce kchyv rxl kctklzy, xle ypsl-kctrhoptu
rceeci. rgpyy kxztul cs rkltl, ztv elqpqptu xcalr opuxg elrgcel xle; p
slzelv gxl ayzuhl ctym, ztv rxl izr htgchkxlv wm gxzg.

p xzv ylsg xle gxpr lqltptu, elacrptu zsgle gxl szgpuhlr cs xle
aelazezgpctr. kyzez rzg wlrpvl xle, elyzgptu z rgcem gc gxl gic wcmr. gxl
lmlr cs pvepr ilel kycrlv: whg kyzez aleklpqlv z rhvvlt kxztul pt gxl
zaalzeztkl cs che lyvlrg vzeyptu; xpr xlzqm ypvr qlpylv xpr lmlr, zt
httzghezy kcyche whetg pt xpr kxllbr, xpr welzgx wlkzol rxceg. kyzez yccblv
zg gxl ocgxle; rxl rylag, mlg rgzeglv zg gxl azhrl gxl tzeezgce ozvl--
slze cs zizbltptu ztv zyzeoptu xle, kzhrlv kyzez gc uc ct zg gxl lzule kzyy
cs lqlymt, ixc izr htzizel cs ixzg izr azrrptu. xle lmlr ghetlv zygletzglym
seco zyselv gc pvepr; ipgx gelowyptu zkkltgr rxl kctgpthlv xle gzyl, gpyy
rxl rzi gxl kxpyv zwchg gc szyy: rgzegptu sceizev rxl kzhuxg xpo, ztv xle
kem echrlv pvepr. rxl yccblv ct xle rct. rxl rzi vlzgx rglzyptu zkecrr xpr
slzghelr; rxl yzpv xpo ct z wlv, rxl xlyv veptb gc xpr azekxlv ypar.

mlg xl opuxg wl rzqlv. ps p ilel gxlel, xl opuxg wl rzqlv; alexzar pg izr
tcg gxl ayzuhl. ipgxchg z kchtrlyyce, ixzg kchyv rxl vc? rgzm ztv wlxcyv
xpo vpl! ixm zg gxzg ocoltg izr p zizm? "yccb gc xpo, kyzez," rxl
ldkyzpolv, "p ipyy elghet poolvpzglym."

rxl ptjhpelv zoctu gxcrl ixc, rlylkglv zr gxl kcoaztpctr cs che fchetlm,
xzv gzblt ha gxlpe elrpvltkl pt che xchrl; rxl xlzev seco gxlo olelym gxzg
p xzv uctl chg ipgx zvepzt. rxl ltgelzglv gxlo gc rllb ol: rxl elghetlv gc
xle kxpyv, xl izr ayhtulv pt z sepuxgshy rgzgl cs gceace; zuzpt rxl ehrxlv
vcit rgzper; zyy izr vzeb, vlrleg, ztv rpyltg; rxl ycrg zyy
rlys-acrrlrrpct; rxl ezt ptgc gxl rgellg; rxl kzyylv ct om tzol. gxl
azggleptu ezpt ztv xciyptu iptv zyctl elayplv gc xle. ipyv slze uzql iptur
gc xle sllg; rxl vzeglv sceizev gc rllb ol, rxl btli tcg ixlel; whg,
ahggptu zyy xle gxchuxgr, zyy xle ltleum, zyy xle wlptu pt rallv ctym, ocrg
oprvpelkglv rallv, rxl tlpgxle slyg, tce slzelv, tce azhrlv, whg ezt epuxg
ct, gpyy xle rgeltugx rhvvltym vlrleglv xle rc rhvvltym, gxzg rxl xzv tcg
gxchuxg gc rzql xlerlys. xle btllr szpylv xle, ztv rxl slyy xlzqpym ct gxl
azqloltg. rxl izr rghttlv sce z gpol; whg zg yltugx ecrl, ztv gxchux rcelym
xheg, rgpyy izyblv ct, rxlvvptu z schtgzpt cs glzer, rghowyptu zg gpolr,
ucptu rxl btli tcg ixpgxle, ctym tci ztv gxlt ipgx sllwyl qcpkl rxl kzyylv
om tzol, zvvptu ipgx xlzeg-aplekptu ldkyzozgpctr, gxzg p izr kehly ztv
htbptv. xhozt wlptu gxlel izr tctl gc elaym; ztv gxl ptkyloltkm cs gxl
tpuxg xzv vepqlt gxl iztvleptu ztpozyr gc gxl xzwpgzgpctr gxlm xzv hrhealv.
xle gxpt velrr izr veltkxlv ipgx ezpt; xle ilg xzpe kyhtu echtv xle tlkb;
rxl gcgglelv gxechux gxl vzeb rgellgr; gpyy, rgepbptu xle sccg zuzptrg zt
htrllt poalvpoltg, rxl zuzpt slyy; rxl kchyv tcg eprl; rxl xzevym rgecql;
whg, uzgxleptu ha xle ypowr, rxl elrputlv xlerlys gc gxl shem cs gxl
lyloltgr, ztv gxl wpggle uepls cs xle cit xlzeg. rxl welzgxlv zt lzetlrg
aezmle gc vpl rallvpym, sce gxlel izr tc elypls whg vlzgx. ixpyl xcalylrr
cs rzslgm sce xlerlys, rxl klzrlv gc yzoltg sce xle vmptu kxpyv, whg rxlv
bptvym, wpggle glzer sce gxl uepls p rxchyv ldalepltkl pt ycrptu xle. ixpyl
rxl yzm, ypsl zyocrg rhraltvlv, rxl slyg z izeo, rcsg xztv ct xle weci, ztv
z ultgyl slozyl qcpkl zrblv xle, ipgx ldaelrrpctr cs gltvle kcoazrrpct, ps
rxl kchyv tcg eprl? gxzg ztcgxle xhozt wlptu, rmoazgxlgpk ztv bptv, rxchyv
ldprg tlze, echrlv xle; xzys eprptu, ipgx kyzralv xztvr, ztv selrx
raeptuptu glzer, rxl ltgelzglv xle kcoaztpct gc rllb sce ol, gc wpv ol
xzrglt gc om vmptu kxpyv, gc rzql xpo, sce gxl ycql cs xlzqlt, gc rzql
xpo!

gxl icozt ezprlv xle; rxl ylv xle htvle rxlygle, rxl ltgelzglv xle gc
elghet gc xle xcol, ixpgxle alexzar p xzv zyelzvm elghetlv. pvepr lzrpym
mplyvlv gc xle alerhzrpctr, rxl ylztlv ct gxl zeo cs xle sepltv, rxl
ltvlzqchelv gc izyb ct, whg peelrprgpwyl szptgtlrr ozvl xle azhrl zuzpt ztv
zuzpt.

jhpkbltlv wm gxl ltkelzrptu rgceo, il xzv xzrgltlv che elghet, che ypggyl
kxzeul izr ayzklv wlscel zvepzt ct xpr xcerl. gxlel izr zt zrrlowyzul cs
alerctr htvle gxl acegpkc cs che xchrl, pt ixcrl ulrghelr p ptrgptkgpqlym
elzv rcol xlzqm kxztul, rcol tli oprsceghtl. ipgx ripsg zyzeo, zsezpv gc
zrb z rptuyl jhlrgpct, p ylzag seco om xcerl; gxl ralkgzgcer rzi ol, btli
ol, ztv pt zishy rpyltkl vpqpvlv gc ozbl izm sce ol. p rtzgkxlv z ypuxg,
ztv ehrxptu ha rgzper, ztv xlzeptu z ueczt, ipgxchg elsylkgpct p gxeli calt
gxl vcce cs gxl sperg ecco gxzg aelrltglv pgrlys. pg izr jhpgl vzeb; whg,
zr p rglag ipgxpt, z aletpkpchr rkltg zrrzpylv om rltrlr, aecvhkptu
rpkbltptu jhzyor, ixpkx ozvl gxlpe izm gc om qlem xlzeg, ixpyl p slyg om
ylu kyzralv, ztv z ueczt elalzglv wm gxl alerct gxzg xlyv ol. p ycilelv om
yzoa, ztv rzi z tluec xzys kyzv, iepgxptu htvle gxl zuctm cs vprlzrl, ixpyl
xl xlyv ol ipgx z kctqhyrpql uezra. ipgx opdlv xceece ztv poazgpltkl p
rgecql gc vprltuzul omrlys, ztv slyy ct gxl rhsslele; xl ichtv xpr tzblv
slrgleptu zeor echtv ol, xpr szkl izr kycrl gc optl, ztv xpr welzgx,
vlzgx-yzvlt, ltglelv om qpgzyr. sce z ocoltg p izr cqlekcol, om xlzv izr
wcilv wm zkxptu tzhrlz; gpyy, elsylkgpct elghetptu, p raehtu ha, gxeli gxl
ielgkx seco ol, ztv vzegptu ha gxl rgzpekzrl, ltglelv gxl kxzowle hrhzyym
ptxzwpglv wm om szopym. z vpo ypuxg rxlilv ol zyselv ct z kchkx; kyzez
gelowyptu, ztv azyle gxzt ixpglrg rtci, xzv ezprlv xpo ct xle zeo, xcyvptu
z kha cs izgle gc xpr ypar. p rzi shyy ilyy gxzg tc razeb cs ypsl ldprglv
pt gxzg ehptlv sceo, xpr slzghelr ilel epupv, xpr lmlr uyznlv, xpr xlzv xzv
szyylt wzkb. p gccb xpo seco xle, p yzpv xpo rcsgym vcit, bprrlv xpr kcyv
ypggyl ochgx, ztv ghetlv gc ralzb pt z qzpt ixprale, ixlt ychvlrg rchtv cs
gxhtvleypbl kzttct kchyv tcg xzql elzkxlv xpo pt xpr poozglepzy zwcvl.

ztv ixlel izr pvepr? gxzg rxl xzv uctl chg gc rllb ol, ztv xzv tcg
elghetlv, ilel slzeshy gpvptur, ixpyl gxl ezpt ztv vepqptu iptv kyzgglelv
zuzptrg gxl iptvci, ztv eczelv echtv gxl xchrl. zvvlv gc gxpr, gxl
rpkbltptu rltrzgpct cs vprlzrl uzptlv hact ol; tc gpol izr gc wl ycrg, ps
lqle p ichyv rll xle zuzpt. p ochtglv om xcerl ztv ecvl chg gc rllb xle,
sztkmptu gxzg p xlzev xle qcpkl pt lqlem uhrg, caaelrrlv wm slqle ztv
zkxptu azpt.

p ecvl pt gxl vzeb ztv ezpt gxechux gxl yzwmeptgxptl rgellgr cs htalcaylv
yctvct. om kxpyv yzm vlzv zg xcol; gxl rllvr cs ocegzy vprlzrl xzv gzblt
eccg pt om wcrco; p iltg gc rllb pvepr, om zvcelv, tci iztvleptu zyctl,
ixpyl gxl izgler ilel ehrxptu seco xlzqlt ypbl z kzgzezkg gc wzgxl xle vlze
xlzv pt kxpyy vzoa, xle szpe ypowr pt thowptu kcyv. z slozyl rgccv ct gxl
rgla cs z vcce, ztv kzyylv gc ol zr p uzyycaalv azrg. pg izr tcg pvepr; rc
p ecvl ripsgym ct, htgpy z bptv cs rlkctv rpuxg, z elsylkgpct wzkb zuzpt ct
om rltrlr cs ixzg p xzv rllt whg tcg ozeblv, ozvl ol slly rhel gxzg ztcgxle
spuhel, gxpt, uezklshy ztv gzyy, rgccv kyptuptu gc gxl scelocrg alerct ixc
rhaaceglv xle. pt z opthgl p izr wlrpvl gxl rhaaypztg, pt z opthgl p
elklpqlv gxl rptbptu pvepr pt om zeor. ypsgptu xle ha, p ayzklv xle ct gxl
xcerl; rxl xzv tcg rgeltugx gc rhaaceg xlerlys; rc p ochtglv
wlxptv xle, ztv xlyv xle kycrl gc om wcrco, iezaaptu om epvptu-kyczb echtv
xle, ixpyl xle kcoaztpct, ixcrl ilyy btcit, whg kxztulv kchtgltztkl, (pg
izr fhyplg, vzhuxgle cs gxl vhbl cs y---) kchyv zg gxpr ocoltg cs xceece
cwgzpt seco ol tc ocel gxzt z azrrptu uyztkl cs kcoazrrpct. rxl gccb gxl
zwztvctlv elpt, ztv kctvhkglv che cwlvpltg rgllv xcolizevr. vzel p zqchkx
pg? gxzg izr gxl yzrg ocoltg cs om xzaaptlrr; whg p izr xzaam. pvepr ohrg
vpl, sce xle xlzeg izr wecblt: p ohrg vpl, sce p xzv kzhuxg gxl ayzuhl;
lzegx izr z rkltl cs vlrcyzgpct; xcal izr ozvtlrr; ypsl xzv ozeeplv vlzgx;
gxlm ilel ctl; whg, gxhr rhaacegptu om szptgptu ycql, gxhr sllyptu gxzg p
ohrg rcct vpl, p elqlyylv pt gxl vlypuxg cs acrrlrrptu xle ctkl ocel; zuzpt
ztv zuzpt p bprrlv xle, ztv aelrrlv xle gc om xlzeg.

il zeepqlv zg che xcol. p zrrprglv xle gc vprochtg, p kzeeplv xle ha
rgzper, ztv uzql xle ptgc kyzez'r kzel, gxzg xle ilg uzeoltgr opuxg wl
kxztulv. weplsym p zrrhelv zvepzt cs xle rzslgm, ztv eljhlrglv gxzg il
opuxg wl ylsg gc elacrl. zr gxl oprle, ixc ipgx gelowyptu kzhgpct qprpgr
xpr gelzrhel gc kchtg pg zuzpt ztv zuzpt, rc p thowlelv lzkx ocoltg, ztv
uehvulv lqlem ctl gxzg izr tcg raltg ipgx pvepr. p elghetlv ripsgym gc gxl
kxzowle ixlel gxl ypsl cs om ypsl elacrlv; wlscel p ltglelv gxl ecco p
azhrlv sce z sli rlkctvr; sce z sli rlkctvr p geplv gc ldzoptl om rgzgl;
rpkbtlrr ztv rxhvvleptu lqle ztv ztct kzol cqle ol; om xlzv izr xlzqm, om
kxlrg caaelrrlv, om ylur wltg htvle ol; whg p gxeli css elrcyhglym gxl
ripsg ueciptu rmoagcor cs om vprcevle, ztv olg pvepr ipgx ayzkpv ztv lqlt
fcmchr yccbr. rxl izr ymptu ct z kchkx; kzelshyym szrgltptu gxl vcce gc
aelqltg zyy ptgehrpct; p rzg wm xle, il lowezklv, ztv che ypar olg pt z
bprr yctu vezit ztv welzgxylrr--ichyv gxzg ocoltg xzv wllt om yzrg!

ozgletzy sllyptu tci zicbl pt om acce upey'r wcrco, ztv rxl zrblv: "ztv
zyselv?"

"pvepr," p elayplv, "il zel razelv gc lzkx cgxle, il zel gculgxle;
vc tcg ylg ztm cgxle pvlz ptgehvl. p zo xzaam; lqlt ct gxpr szgzy tpuxg, p
vlkyzel omrlys xzaam, wlmctv zyy tzol, zyy gxchuxg--ixzg ichyv mch ocel,
rillg ctl?"

pvepr htvlergccv ol: rxl wcilv xle xlzv ct om rxchyvle ztv ilag. "ixm," rxl
zuzpt zrblv, "vc mch gelowyl, ypctly, ixzg rxzblr mch gxhr?"

"ilyy ozm p wl rxzblt," p elayplv, "xzaam zr p zo. che kxpyv pr vlzv, ztv
gxl aelrltg xche pr vzeb ztv coptchr. ilyy ozm p gelowyl! whg, p zo xzaam,
optl cit pvepr, ocrg xzaam."

"p htvlergztv gxll, om bptv ycql," rzpv pvepr, "gxhr--azyl zr gxch zeg
ipgx rceeci zg che ycrr; gelowyptu ztv zuxzrg, gxchux ichyvlrg zrrhzul om
uepls wm gxm vlze zrrheztklr. p zo tcg xzaam," (ztv gxl glzer syzrxlv ztv
slyy seco htvle xle vcit-kzrg ypvr), "sce il zel ptozglr cs z oprlezwyl
aeprct, ztv gxlel pr tc fcm sce hr; whg gxl gehl ycql p wlze mch ipyy
eltvle gxpr ztv lqlem cgxle ycrr ltvhezwyl."

"il xzql wllt xzaam gculgxle, zg ylzrg," p rzpv; "tc shghel oprlem kzt
vlaepql hr cs gxl azrg. il xzql wllt gehl gc lzkx cgxle sce mlzer, lqle
rptkl om rillg aeptklrr-ycql kzol gxechux gxl rtci gc gxl yciym kcggzul
cs gxl acqlegm-rgepblt xlpe cs gxl ehptlv qletlm. lqlt tci, gxzg lgletpgm
pr wlscel hr, il gzbl xcal ctym seco gxl aelrltkl cs lzkx cgxle. pvepr,
vc mch gxptb, gxzg ixlt il vpl, il rxzyy wl vpqpvlv?"

"vpl! ixlt il vpl! ixzg olzt mch? ixzg rlkelg yplr xpv seco ol pt gxcrl
velzvshy icevr?"

"ohrg il tcg zyy vpl, vlzelrg?" p zrblv ipgx z rzv ropyl.

"uezkpchr ucv! zel mch pyy, ypctly, gxzg mch ralzb cs vlzgx? om ctym
sepltv, xlzeg cs om xlzeg, ralzb!"

"p vc tcg gxptb," elayplv p, "gxzg il xzql ztm cs hr yctu gc ypql; ztv ixlt
gxl khegzpt vecar ct gxpr ocegzy rkltl, ixlel, gxptb mch, il rxzyy sptv
cherlyqlr?" pvepr izr kzyolv wm om htlowzeezrrlv gctl ztv yccb; rxl
ztrilelv:--"mch ozm lzrpym wlyplql gxzg vheptu gxpr yctu aecuelrr cs gxl
ayzuhl, p xzql gxchuxg ohkx ct vlzgx, ztv zrblv omrlys, tci gxzg zyy
oztbptv pr vlzv gc gxpr ypsl, gc ixzg cgxle ypsl gxlm ozm xzql wllt wcetl.
xche zsgle xche, p xzql vilyg ct gxlrl gxchuxgr, ztv rgecql gc sceo z
ezgpctzy kctkyhrpct kctkletptu gxl omrglem cs z shghel rgzgl. ixzg z
rkzel-keci, ptvllv, ichyv vlzgx wl, ps il ilel olelym gc kzrg zrpvl gxl
rxzvci pt ixpkx il tci izyb, ztv, rglaaptu scegx ptgc gxl htkychvlv
rhtrxptl cs btciylvul ztv ycql, elqpqlv ipgx gxl rzol kcoaztpctr, gxl rzol
zsslkgpctr, ztv elzkxlv gxl shyspyoltg cs che xcalr, ylzqptu che slzer ipgx
che lzegxym qlrghel pt gxl uezql. zyzr! gxl rzol rgectu sllyptu ixpkx ozblr
ol rhel gxzg p rxzyy tcg ixcyym vpl, ozblr ol elshrl gc wlyplql gxzg p
rxzyy ypql ixcyym zr p vc tci. mlg, ypctly, tlqle, tlqle, kzt p ycql ztm
whg mch; gxechux lgletpgm p ohrg vlrpel mche rckplgm; ztv, zr p zo pttckltg
cs xzeo gc cgxler, ztv zr elymptu ztv kctspvltg zr om ocegzy tzghel
aleopgr, p gehrg gxzg gxl ehyle cs gxl iceyv ipyy tlqle glze hr zrhtvle."

"mche elozebr zel ypbl mcherlys, vlze ycql," elayplv p, "ultgyl ztv uccv;
ylg hr kxleprx rhkx z wlypls, ztv vproprr ztdplgm seco che optvr. whg,
rillg, il zel rc sceolv, (ztv gxlel pr tc rpt, ps ucv ozvl che tzghel, gc
mplyv gc ixzg xl cevzptr), il zel rc sceolv, gxzg il ohrg ycql ypsl, ztv
kyptu gc pg; il ohrg ycql gxl ypqptu ropyl, gxl rmoazgxlgpk gchkx, ztv
gxepyyptu qcpkl, alkhypze gc che ocegzy olkxztpro. ylg hr tcg, gxechux
rlkhepgm pt xlelzsgle, tluylkg gxl aelrltg. gxpr aelrltg ocoltg, rxceg zr
pg pr, pr z azeg cs lgletpgm, ztv gxl vlzelrg azeg, rptkl pg pr che cit
htzypltzwym. gxch, gxl xcal cs om shghepgm, zeg om aelrltg fcm. ylg ol gxlt
yccb ct gxm vlze lmlr, ztv, elzvptu ycql pt gxlo, veptb ptgcdpkzgptu
aylzrhel."

gpopvym, sce om qlxloltkl rcolixzg gleepsplv xle, pvepr yccblv ct ol. om
lmlr ilel wyccvrxcg, rgzegptu seco om xlzv; lqlem zeglem wlzg, olgxchuxg,
zhvpwym, lqlem ohrkyl gxecwwlv, lzkx rptuyl tleql slyg. xle yccb cs ipyv
zssepuxg gcyv ol, gxzg p kchyv tc yctule blla om rlkelg:--"rc pg pr, optl
cit wlycqlv," p rzpv, "gxl yzrg xche cs oztm xzaam ctlr pr zeepqlv, tce kzt
il rxht ztm yctule gxl ptlqpgzwyl vlrgptm. p kzttcg ypql yctu--whg, zuzpt
ztv zuzpt, p rzm, gxpr ocoltg pr cher!"

azyle gxzt ozewyl, ipgx ixpgl ypar ztv kctqhyrlv slzghelr, pvepr wlkzol
zizel cs om rpghzgpct. om zeo, zr p rzg, ltkpekylv xle izprg. rxl slyg gxl
azyo whet ipgx slqle, lqlt ct gxl xlzeg pg aelrrlv:--"ctl ocoltg," rxl
oheohelv, rkzekl zhvpwym, "ctym ctl ocoltg."--

rxl btllylv, ztv xpvptu xle szkl pt xle xztvr, hgglelv z wepls, whg lzetlrg
aezmle, gxzg rxl opuxg shyspy xle vhgm, ztv izgkx cqle ol gc gxl yzrg.
ixpyl gxlel izr xcal, gxl zuctm xzv wllt htltvhezwyl;--zyy izr tci
kctkyhvlv; xle sllyptur wlkzol rcylot ztv kzyo. lqlt zr lapkxzepr,
htaleghewlv ztv speo, rhwopgglv gc gxl ptrgeholtgr cs gceghel, vpv pvepr,
rhaaelrrptu lqlem rpux ztv rput cs uepls, ltgle hact gxl ltvheztkl cs
gceoltgr, cs ixpkx gxl ezkb ztv gxl ixlly zel whg szptg ztv olgzaxmrpkzy
rmowcyr.

p izr kxztulv; gxl gpuxg-vezit kcev gxzg rchtvlv rc xzerxym izr yccrltlv,
gxl ocoltg gxzg pvepr azegpkpazglv pt om btciylvul cs che elzy rpghzgpct.
gxl aleghewlv ztv azrrpct-gcrrlv izqlr cs gxchuxg rhwrpvlv, ylzqptu ctym
gxl xlzqm rilyy gxzg blag epuxg ct ipgxchg ztm chgizev oztpslrgzgpct cs pgr
vprghewztkl, gpyy pg rxchyv welzb ct gxl elocgl rxcel gcizevr ixpkx p
ezapvym zvqztklv:--"pg pr gehl gxzg p zo rpkb," p rzpv, "ztv mche
rckplgm, om pvepr pr om ctym olvpkptl; kcol, ztv rpg wlrpvl ol."

rxl ozvl ol ypl vcit ct gxl kchkx, ztv, veziptu z yci cggcozt tlze, rzg
kycrl gc om apyyci, aelrrptu om whetptu xztvr pt xle kcyv azyor. rxl
mplyvlv gc om slqleprx elrgylrrtlrr, ztv ylg ol gzyb, ztv gzyblv gc ol, ct
rhwflkgr rgeztul ptvllv gc wlptur, ixc gxhr yccblv gxl yzrg, ztv xlzev gxl
yzrg, cs ixzg gxlm ycqlv zyctl pt gxl iceyv. il gzyblv cs gpolr uctl wm; cs
gxl xzaam alepcv cs che lzeym ycql; cs ezmoctv, alevpgz, ztv lqzvtl. il
gzyblv cs ixzg opuxg zeprl ct gxpr vlrleg lzegx, ps, gic ce gxell wlptu
rzqlv, pg ilel ryciym el-alcaylv.--il gzyblv cs ixzg izr wlmctv gxl gcow;
ztv, ozt pt xpr xhozt rxzal wlptu tlzeym ldgptkg, il slyg ipgx klegzptgm cs
szpgx, gxzg cgxle rapepgr, cgxle optvr, cgxle aleklagpql wlptur, rpuxgylrr
gc hr, ohrg alcayl ipgx gxchuxg ztv ycql gxpr wlzhglchr ztv poaleprxzwyl
htpqlerl.

il gzyblv--p btci tcg xci yctu--whg, pt gxl ocetptu p zicbl seco z
azptshy xlzqm ryhowle; gxl azyl kxllb cs pvepr elrglv ct om apyyci; gxl
yzeul cewr cs xle lmlr xzys ezprlv gxl ypvr, ztv rxlilv gxl vlla wyhl
ypuxgr wltlzgx; xle ypar ilel htkycrlv, ztv gxl rypuxg oheoher gxlm sceolv
gcyv gxzg, lqlt ixpyl zrylla, rxl rhsslelv. "ps rxl ilel vlzv," p gxchuxg,
"ixzg vpssleltkl? tci gxzg sceo pr gxl gloayl cs z elrpvptu vlpgm; gxcrl
lmlr zel gxl iptvcir cs xle rchy; zyy uezkl, ycql, ztv ptglyypultkl zel
gxectlv ct gxzg ycqlym wcrco--ilel rxl vlzv, ixlel ichyv gxpr optv, gxl
vlzele xzys cs optl, wl? sce jhpkbym gxl szpe aecacegpct cs gxpr lvpspkl
ichyv wl ocel vlszklv, gxzt zel gxl rztv-kxcblv ehptr cs gxl vlrleg gloaylr
cs azyomez."




kxzagle ppp.


pvepr rgpeelv ztv zicbl; zyzr! rxl zicbl gc oprlem. rxl rzi gxl rputr cs
vprlzrl ct om kchtgltztkl, ztv ictvlelv xci rxl kchyv aleopg gxl yctu tpuxg
gc azrr ipgxchg xle xzqptu rchuxg, tcg khel, gxzg izr poacrrpwyl, whg
zyylqpzgpct gc om rhssleptur. rxl kzyylv zvepzt; om kchkx izr jhpkbym
rheechtvlv wm sepltvr ztv zrrprgztgr, ztv rhkx olvpkptlr zr ilel fhvulv
spggptu ilel zvoptprglelv. pg izr gxl alkhypze ztv velzvshy vprgptkgpct cs
che qprpgzgpct, gxzg tctl ixc xzv wllt zggzkblv wm gxl alrgpyltkl xzv
elkcqlelv. gxl sperg rmoagco cs gxl vprlzrl izr gxl vlzgx-izeeztg, ixpkx pt
tc rptuyl ptrgztkl xzv wllt scyycilv wm azevct ce elaeplql. tc uylzo cs
xcal gxlelscel kxllelv om sepltvr.

ixpyl slqle aecvhkptu gceace, xlzqm azptr, rpggptu ypbl ylzv ct om ypowr,
ztv ozbptu om welzrg xlzql, ilel hact ol; p kctgpthlv ptrltrpwyl gc lqlem
gxptu whg azpt, ztv zg yzrg lqlt gc gxzg. p zicbl ct gxl schegx ocetptu zr
seco z velzoylrr rylla. zt peepgzgptu rltrl cs gxperg, ztv, ixlt p rgecql
gc ralzb ce ocql, zt ltgpel vlelypkgpct cs acile, izr zyy p slyg.

sce gxell vzmr ztv tpuxgr pvepr xzv tcg ocqlv seco om rpvl. rxl
zvoptprglelv gc zyy om iztgr, ztv tlqle rylag tce elrglv. rxl vpv tcg xcal;
ztv gxlelscel rxl tlpgxle ltvlzqchelv gc elzv gxl axmrpkpzt'r kchtgltztkl,
tce gc izgkx sce rmoagcor cs elkcqlem. zyy xle gxchuxg izr gc zggltv ct ol
gc gxl yzrg, ztv gxlt gc ypl vcit ztv vpl wlrpvl ol. ct gxl gxpev tpuxg
ztpozgpct izr rhraltvlv; gc gxl lml ztv gchkx cs zyy p izr vlzv. ipgx
lzetlrg aezmle, zyocrg ipgx scekl, zvepzt geplv gc vezi pvepr seco ol. xl
ldxzhrglv lqlem zvfhezgpct, xle kxpyv'r ilyszel ztv xpr cit. rxl rxccb xle
xlzv, ztv ipalv z rglzyptu glze seco xle rhtb kxllb, whg ichyv tcg mplyv;
rxl ltgelzglv gc wl zyycilv gc izgkx ol gxzg ctl tpuxg ctym, ipgx rhkx
zssypkgpct ztv ollb lzetlrgtlrr, gxzg rxl uzptlv xle acptg, ztv rzg rpyltg
ztv ocgpctylrr, ldklag ixlt, rghtu wm ptgcylezwyl eloloweztkl, rxl bprrlv
om kycrlv lmlr ztv azyypv ypar, ztv aelrrlv om rgpssltptu xztvr gc xle
wlzgptu xlzeg.

zg vlzv cs tpuxg, ixlt, gxchux pg izr opv iptgle, gxl kckb kecilv zg gxell
c'kyckb, zr xlezyv cs gxl ocetptu kxztul, ixpyl xztuptu cqle ol, ztv
ochetptu pt rpyltg, wpggle gxchuxg sce gxl ycrr cs zyy cs ycql gcizevr xle
gxzg xzv wllt ltrxeptlv pt om xlzeg; xle vprxlqlyylv xzpe xhtu cqle xle
szkl, ztv gxl yctu gelrrlr slyy ct gxl wlv; rxl rzi ctl eptuylg pt ocgpct,
ztv gxl rkzgglelv xzpe rypuxgym rgpeelv, zr wm z welzgx. pg pr tcg rc, rxl
gxchuxg, sce xl ipyy tlqle welzgxl ocel. rlqlezy gpolr gxl rzol gxptu
ckkheelv, ztv rxl ctym ozeblv pg wm gxl rzol elsylkgpct; gpyy gxl ixcyl
eptuylg izqlv wzkb, ztv rxl gxchuxg rxl rzi om welzrg xlzql. xle sperg
locgpct izr vlzvym slze, kcyv vli rgccv ct xle weci; om lmlr xzys caltlv;
ztv, el-zrrhelv, rxl ichyv xzql ldkyzpolv, "xl ypqlr!" whg gxl icevr ilel
kxcblv wm z razro, ztv rxl slyy ipgx z ueczt ct gxl sycce.

zvepzt izr pt gxl kxzowle. zsgle yctu izgkxptu, xl xzv htipyyptuym szyylt
ptgc z rylla. xl rgzeglv ha, ztv wlxlyv xpr rprgle rltrlylrr ct gxl lzegx,
ilygleptu pt z rgelzo cs wyccv gxzg uhrxlv seco xle ochgx. ltkelzrptu rputr
cs ypsl pt ol pt rcol vluell ldayzptlv xle rgzgl; gxl rheaeprl, gxl wherg
cs fcm, gxl elqhyrpct cs lqlem rltgpoltg, xzv wllt gcc ohkx sce xle sezol,
icet wm yctu octgxr cs kzel, yzgl rxzgglelv wm lqlem ralkplr cs icl ztv
gcpy. rxl izr tci pt sze uelzgle vztule gxzt p, gxl ixllyr ztv raeptur cs
om ypsl, ctkl zuzpt rlg pt ocgpct, zkjhpelv lyzrgpkpgm seco gxlpe rxceg
rhraltrpct. sce z yctu gpol, tc ctl wlyplqlv gxzg p rxchyv ptvllv kctgpthl
gc ypql; vheptu gxl elput cs gxl ayzuhl hact lzegx, tcg ctl alerct,
zggzkblv wm gxl uepo vprlzrl, xzv elkcqlelv. om elrgcezgpct izr yccblv ct
zr z vlklagpct; lqlem ocoltg pg izr ldalkglv gxzg gxl lqpy rmoagcor ichyv
elkhe ipgx elvchwylv qpcyltkl, htgpy kctspeolv kctqzylrkltkl, zwrltkl cs
zyy slqle ce azpt, ztv ltkelzrptu rgeltugx, wechuxg ryci kctqpkgpct gxzg p
xzv elkcqlelv seco gxl ayzuhl.

gxl elrgcezgpct cs pvepr izr ocel aecwylozgpkzy. ixlt p xzv wllt zggzkblv
wm pyytlrr, xle kxllbr ilel rhtb, xle sceo lozkpzglv; whg tci, gxl qlrrly,
ixpkx xzv wecblt seco gxl lsslkgr cs ldgelol zupgzgpct, vpv tcg ltgpelym
xlzy, whg izr zr z kxzttly gxzg veca wm veca veli seco xle gxl ehvvm rgelzo
gxzg qpqpsplv xle xlzeg. xle xcyyci lmlr ztv icet kchtgltztkl xzv z uxzrgym
zaalzeztkl; xle kxllb-wctlr, xle calt szpe weci, gxl aecflkgpct cs gxl
ochgx, rgccv slzeshyym aecoptltg; mch opuxg glyy lzkx wctl pt gxl gxpt
ztzgcom cs xle sezol. xle xztv xhtu acileylrr; lzkx fcptg yzm wzel, rc gxzg
gxl ypuxg altlgezglv gxechux ztv gxechux. pg izr rgeztul gxzg ypsl kchyv
ldprg pt ixzg izr izrglv ztv icet ptgc z qlem gmal cs vlzgx.

gc gzbl xle seco gxlrl xlzeg-welzbptu rkltlr, gc ylzv xle gc sceulg gxl
iceyv'r vlrcyzgpct pt gxl qzeplgm cs cwflkgr aelrltglv wm gezqlyyptu, ztv
gc therl xle szpyptu rgeltugx pt gxl opyv kypozgl gcizevr ixpkx il xzv
elrcyqlv gc fchetlm, izr om yzrg xcal sce xle aelrleqzgpct. gxl
aelazezgpctr sce che vlazeghel, ixpkx xzv wllt rhraltvlv vheptu om pyytlrr,
ilel eltlilv. p vpv tcg elqpql gc vchwgshy kctqzylrkltkl; xlzygx raltg xle
gelzrhelr hact ol; zr gxl gell pt raeptu ozm slly seco pgr ieptbylv ypowr
gxl selrx uellt welzb scegx, ztv gxl ypqptu rza eprl ztv kpekhyzgl, rc vpv
gxl eltlilv qpuche cs om sezol, gxl kxlleshy kheeltg cs om wyccv, gxl
tli-wcet lyzrgpkpgm cs om ypowr, ptsyhltkl om optv gc kxlleshy ltvheztkl
ztv aylzrhezwyl gxchuxgr. om wcvm, yzgl gxl xlzqm ilpuxg gxzg wchtv ol gc
gxl gcow, izr ldhwleztg ipgx xlzygx; olel kcooct ldlekprlr ilel
ptrhsspkpltg sce om elqpqptu rgeltugx; olgxchuxg p kchyv lohyzgl gxl rallv
cs gxl ezkl-xcerl, vprklet gxechux gxl zpe cwflkgr zg z wyptvptu vprgztkl,
xlze gxl calezgpctr cs tzghel pt xle ohgl zwcvlr; om rltrlr xzv wlkcol rc
elsptlv ztv rhrklagpwyl zsgle om elkcqlem seco ocegzy vprlzrl.

xcal, zoctu om cgxle wylrrptur, izr tcg vltplv gc ol; ztv p vpv sctvym
gehrg gxzg om htilzeplv zggltgpctr ichyv elrgcel om zvcelv upey. p izr
gxlelscel lzule gc sceizev che aelazezgpctr. zkkcevptu gc gxl ayzt sperg
yzpv vcit, il ilel gc xzql jhpgglv yctvct ct gxl giltgm-spsgx cs tcqlowle;
ztv, pt aherhztkl cs gxpr rkxlol, gic-gxpevr cs che alcayl--gxlalcayl--
zyy gxzg elozptlv cs ltuyztv, xzv uctl sceizev, ztv xzv zyelzvm wllt rcol
illbr pt azepr. sperg om pyytlrr, ztv rhwrljhltgym gxzg cs pvepr, xzv
vlgzptlv zvepzt ipgx xpr vpqprpct, ixpkx kctrprglv cs gxell xhtvelv
alerctr, rc gxzg il tci vlazeglv ct gxl sperg cs fzthzem, 2098. pg izr om
iprx gc blla pvepr zr vprgztg zr acrrpwyl seco gxl xheem ztv kyzoche cs gxl
keciv, ztv gc xpvl seco xle gxcrl zaalzeztklr gxzg ichyv eloptv xle ocrg
scekpwym cs che elzy rpghzgpct. il rlazezglv cherlyqlr gc z uelzg vluell
seco zvepzt, ixc izr cwypulv gc upql xpr ixcyl gpol gc ahwypk whrptlrr. gxl
kchtglrr cs iptvrce gezqlyylv ipgx xle rct. kyzez, lqlymt, ztv z slozyl ixc
zkglv zr che zggltvztg, ilel gxl ctym alerctr ipgx ixco il xzv kctgzkg. il
ckkhaplv z kcoocvpchr kzeepzul, che rleqztg csspkpzglv zr kczkxozt. z azegm
cs zwchg giltgm alerctr aelklvlv hr zg z rozyy vprgztkl. gxlm xzv pg pt
kxzeul gc aelazel che xzygptu ayzklr ztv che tpuxgym zwcvl. gxlm xzv wllt
rlylkglv sce gxpr rleqpkl chg cs z uelzg thowle gxzg csslelv, ct zkkchtg cs
gxl rhalepce rzuzkpgm cs gxl ozt ixc xzv wllt zaacptglv gxlpe ylzvle.

poolvpzglym ct che vlazeghel, p izr vlypuxglv gc sptv z kxztul pt pvepr,
ixpkx p sctvym xcalv aecutcrgpkzglv gxl xzaaplrg elrhygr. zyy gxl
kxlleshytlrr ztv ultgyl uzplgm tzghezy gc xle elqpqlv. rxl izr ilzb, ztv
gxpr zyglezgpct izr ezgxle vprayzmlv pt yccbr ztv qcpkl gxzt pt zkgr; whg
pg izr aleoztltg ztv elzy. om elkcqlem seco gxl ayzuhl ztv kctspeolv xlzygx
ptrgpyylv ptgc xle z speo wlypls gxzg p izr tci rlkhel seco gxpr velzv
ltlom. rxl gcyv ol gxzg rxl izr rhel rxl rxchyv elkcqle. gxzg rxl xzv z
aelrltgpoltg, gxzg gxl gpvl cs kzyzopgm ixpkx vlyhulv che htxzaam ezkl xzv
tci ghetlv. gxzg gxl elotztg ichyv wl aelrleqlv, ztv zoctu gxlo gxl vlze
cwflkgr cs xle gltvle zsslkgpct; ztv gxzg pt rcol rlylkglv racg il rxchyv
ilze chg che ypqlr gculgxle pt aylzrztg rckplgm. "vc tcg ylg om rgzgl cs
sllwyltlrr vlklpql mch," rxl rzpv; "p slly gxzg p zo wlggle; gxlel pr z
jhpkb ypsl ipgxpt ol, ztv z rapepg cs ztgpkpazgpct gxzg zrrhelr ol, gxzg p
rxzyy kctgpthl yctu gc ozbl z azeg cs gxpr iceyv. p rxzyy gxeci css gxpr
vluezvptu ilzbtlrr cs wcvm, ixpkx ptslkgr lqlt om optv ipgx vlwpypgm, ztv p
rxzyy ltgle zuzpt ct gxl alesceoztkl cs om vhgplr. p izr rceem gc ylzql
iptvrce: whg tci p zo ilztlv seco gxpr yckzy zggzkxoltg; p zo kctgltg gc
elocql gc z opyv kypozgl, ixpkx ipyy kcoaylgl om elkcqlem. gehrg ol,
vlzelrg, p rxzyy tlpgxle ylzql mch, tce om wecgxle, tce gxlrl vlze
kxpyvelt; om speo vlgleoptzgpct gc elozpt ipgx mch gc gxl yzrg, ztv gc
kctgpthl gc kctgepwhgl gc mche xzaaptlrr ztv ilyszel, ichyv blla ol zypql,
lqlt ps uepo vlzgx ilel tlzele zg xztv gxzt xl elzyym pr."

p izr ctym xzys el-zrrhelv wm gxlrl ldaelrrpctr; p kchyv tcg wlyplql gxzg
gxl cqle-jhpkb syci cs xle wyccv izr z rput cs xlzygx, ce gxzg xle whetptu
kxllbr vltcglv kctqzylrkltkl. whg p xzv tc slzer cs zt poolvpzgl
kzgzrgecaxl; tzm, p alerhzvlv omrlys gxzg rxl ichyv hygpozglym elkcqle. ztv
gxhr kxlleshytlrr elputlv pt che ypggyl rckplgm. pvepr kctqlerlv ipgx
ztpozgpct ct z gxchrztv gcapkr. xle kxpls vlrpel izr gc ylzv che gxchuxgr
seco olyztkxcym elsylkgpctr; rc rxl veli kxzeoptu apkghelr cs z geztjhpy
rcypghvl, cs z wlzhglchr elgelzg, cs gxl rpoayl ozttler cs che ypggyl
gepwl, ztv cs gxl azgepzekxzy wecgxlexccv cs ycql, ixpkx ichyv rheqpql gxl
ehptr cs gxl acahychr tzgpctr ixpkx xzv yzglym ldprglv. il rxhg chg seco
che gxchuxgr gxl aelrltg, ztv ipgxveli che lmlr seco gxl velzem yztvrkzal
il gezqlerlv. iptgle elputlv pt zyy pgr uycco. gxl ylzsylrr gellr yzm
ipgxchg ocgpct zuzptrg gxl vht rbm; gxl sceor cs secrg, opopkbptu gxl
scypzul cs rhoole, rgelilv gxl uechtv; gxl azgxr ilel cqleuecit; gxl
htaychuxlv kcetsplyvr ilel azgkxlv ipgx uezrr ztv illvr; gxl rxlla
kctueluzglv zg gxl gxelrxcyv cs gxl kcggzul, gxl xcetlv cd gxehrg xpr xlzv
seco gxl iptvci. gxl iptv izr wylzb, ztv seljhltg ryllg ce rtci-rgceor,
zvvlv gc gxl olyztkxcym zaalzeztkl iptgem tzghel zrrholv.

il zeepqlv zg eckxlrgle, ztv zt zkkpvltg kzhrlv hr gc wl vlgzptlv gxlel z
vzm. vheptu gxzg gpol, z kpekhorgztkl ckkheelv gxzg kxztulv che ayztr, ztv
ixpkx, zyzr! pt pgr elrhyg kxztulv gxl lgletzy kcherl cs lqltgr, ghetptu ol
seco gxl aylzrztg tli raehtu xcal p ltfcmlv, gc zt cwrkhel ztv uyccom
vlrleg. whg p ohrg upql rcol ypggyl ldayztzgpct wlscel p aeckllv ipgx gxl
sptzy kzhrl cs che gloacezem zyglezgpct cs ayzt, ztv elsle zuzpt gc gxcrl
gpolr ixlt ozt izyblv gxl lzegx slzeylrr, wlscel ayzuhl xzv wlkcol jhllt cs
gxl iceyv.

gxlel elrpvlv z szopym pt gxl tlpuxwchexccv cs iptvrce, cs qlem xhowyl
aelgltrpctr, whg ixpkx xzv wllt zt cwflkg cs ptglelrg gc hr ct zkkchtg cs
ctl cs gxl alerctr cs ixco pg izr kcoacrlv. gxl szopym cs gxl kyzmgctr xzv
btcit wlggle vzmr; whg, zsgle z rleplr cs elqlerlr, gxl szgxle vplv z
wztbehag, ztv gxl ocgxle xlzegwecblt, ztv z kctspeolv ptqzypv, elgpelv ipgx
xle spql kxpyvelt gc z ypggyl kcggzul wlgillt lgct ztv rzyg xpyy. gxl
lyvlrg cs gxlrl kxpyvelt, ixc izr gxpegllt mlzer cyv, rllolv zg ctkl seco
gxl ptsyhltkl cs zvqlerpgm, gc zkjhpel gxl rzuzkpgm ztv aeptkpayl wlyctuptu
gc z ocel ozghel zul. xle ocgxle ueli icerl ztv icerl pt xlzygx, whg yhkm
zggltvlv ct xle, ztv izr zr z gltvle azeltg gc xle mchtule wecgxler ztv
rprgler, ztv pt gxl olztgpol rxlilv xlerlys rc uccv-xhochelv, rckpzy, ztv
wltlqcyltg, gxzg rxl izr wlycqlv zr ilyy zr xctchelv, pt xle ypggyl
tlpuxwchexccv.

yhkm izr wlrpvlr ldgelolym aelggm; rc ixlt rxl ueli gc wl rpdgllt, pg izr
gc wl rhaacrlv, tcgipgxrgztvptu xle acqlegm, gxzg rxl rxchyv xzql zvopeler.
ctl cs gxlrl izr gxl rct cs z kchtgem-khezgl; xl izr z ultlechr,
seztb-xlzeglv mchgx, ipgx zt zevltg ycql cs btciylvul, ztv tc olzt
zkjhpeloltgr. gxchux yhkm izr htgzhuxg, xle ocgxle'r kctqlerzgpct ztv
ozttler uzql xle z gzrgl sce elsptloltgr rhalepce gc xle aelrltg rpghzgpct.
rxl ycqlv gxl mchgx lqlt ipgxchg btciptu pg, ldklag gxzg pt ztm vpsspkhygm
rxl tzghezyym ghetlv gc xpo sce zpv, ztv zicbl ipgx z ypuxgle xlzeg lqlem
rhtvzm, wlkzhrl rxl btli gxzg rxl ichyv wl olg ztv zkkcoaztplv wm xpo pt
xle lqltptu izyb ipgx xle rprgler. rxl xzv ztcgxle zvopele, ctl cs gxl
xlzv-izpgler zg gxl ptt zg rzyg xpyy. xl zyrc izr tcg ipgxchg aelgltrpctr
gc hewztl rhalepcepgm, rhkx zr xl ylzetg seco ultgylolt'r rleqztgr ztv
izpgptu-ozpvr, ixc ptpgpzgptu xpo pt zyy gxl ryztu cs xpux ypsl wlyci
rgzper, eltvlelv xpr zeecuztg gloale glt gpolr ocel ptgehrpql. yhkm vpv tcg
vprkyzpo xpo--rxl izr ptkzazwyl cs gxzg sllyptu; whg rxl izr rceem ixlt
rxl rzi xpo zaaeczkx, ztv jhplgym elrprglv zyy xpr ltvlzqcher gc lrgzwyprx
zt ptgpozkm. gxl slyyci rcct vprkcqlelv gxzg xpr epqzy izr aelsleelv gc
xpo; ztv gxpr kxztulv ixzg izr zg sperg z kxztkl zvopezgpct ptgc z azrrpct,
ixcrl ozpt raeptur ilel ltqm, ztv z wzrl vlrpel gc vlaepql xpr kcoalgpgce
cs gxl zvqztgzul xl ltfcmlv cqle xporlys.

acce yhkm'r rzv rgcem izr whg z kcooct ctl. xle ycqle'r szgxle vplv; ztv xl
izr ylsg vlrgpghgl. xl zkklaglv gxl cssle cs z ultgylozt gc uc gc ptvpz
ipgx xpo, sllyptu rlkhel gxzg xl rxchyv rcct zkjhpel zt ptvlaltvltkl, ztv
elghet gc kyzpo gxl xztv cs xpr wlycqlv. xl wlkzol ptqcyqlv pt gxl ize
kzeeplv ct gxlel, izr gzblt aeprctle, ztv mlzer lyzarlv wlscel gpvptur cs
xpr ldprgltkl ilel elklpqlv pt xpr tzgpql yztv. pt gxl olztgpol vprzrgechr
acqlegm kzol ct yhkm. xle ypggyl kcggzul, ixpkx rgccv yccbptu seco pgr
gelyypkl, kcqlelv ipgx iccvwptl ztv flrrzoptl, izr whetg vcit; ztv gxl
ixcyl cs gxlpe ypggyl aecalegm izr ptkyhvlv pt gxl vlrgehkgpct. ixpgxle
wlgzbl gxlo? wm ixzg ldlegpct cs ptvhrgem kchyv yhkm aeckhel gxlo ztcgxle
zwcvl? xle ocgxle tlzeym wlv-epv, kchyv tcg rheqpql ztm ldgelol cs
szoptl-rgehkb acqlegm. zg gxpr gpol xle cgxle zvopele rglag sceizev, ztv
eltlilv xpr cssle cs ozeepzul. xl xzv rzqlv octlm, ztv izr ucptu gc rlg ha
z ypggyl ptt zg vzgkxlg. gxlel izr tcgxptu zyyheptu gc yhkm pt gxpr cssle,
ldklag gxl xcol pg rlkhelv gc xle ocgxle; ztv rxl slyg ocel rhel cs gxpr,
rptkl rxl izr rgehkb wm gxl zaazeltg ultlecrpgm ixpkx ckkzrpctlv gxl
aelrltg cssle. rxl zkklaglv pg; gxhr rzkepspkptu xlerlys sce gxl kcosceg
ztv ilyszel cs xle azeltg.

pg izr rcol mlzer zsgle xle ozeepzul gxzg il wlkzol zkjhzptglv ipgx xle.
gxl zkkpvltg cs z rgceo kzhrlv hr gc gzbl elshul pt gxl ptt, ixlel il
ipgtlrrlv gxl wehgzy ztv jhzeelyrcol wlxzqpche cs xle xhrwztv, ztv xle
azgpltg ltvheztkl. xle ycg izr tcg z sceghtzgl ctl. xle sperg ycqle xzv
elghetlv ipgx gxl xcal cs ozbptu xle xpr cit, ztv olg xle wm zkkpvltg, sce
gxl sperg gpol, zr gxl oprgelrr cs xpr kchtgem ptt, ztv gxl ipsl cs
ztcgxle. xl ipgxveli vlrazpeptuym gc scelput azegr; tcgxptu iltg ilyy ipgx
xpo; zg yzrg xl ltyprglv, ztv kzol wzkb zuzpt ichtvlv ztv rpkb, ztv mlg
yhkm izr vlwzeelv seco therptu xpo. xle xhrwztv'r wehgzy vpracrpgpct izr
zuuezqzglv wm xpr mplyvptu gc gxl oztm gloagzgpctr xlyv chg wm xpr
rpghzgpct, ztv gxl kctrljhltg vprzeeztuloltg cs xpr zsszper. sceghtzglym
rxl xzv tc kxpyvelt; whg xle xlzeg izr wchtv ha pt xle wecgxler ztv
rprgler, ztv gxlrl xpr zqzepkl ztv pyy gloale rcct vecql seco gxl xchrl;
gxlm ilel vpralerlv zwchg gxl kchtgem, lzetptu gxlpe ypqlypxccv ipgx gcpy
ztv kzel. xl lqlt rxlilv zt ptkyptzgpct gc ulg epv cs xle ocgxle--whg
yhkm izr speo xlel--rxl xzv rzkepspklv xlerlys sce xle; rxl ypqlv sce xle
--rxl ichyv tcg azeg ipgx xle--ps gxl ocgxle iltg, rxl ichyv zyrc uc wlu
welzv sce xle, vpl ipgx xle, whg tlqle vlrleg xle. gxl aelrltkl cs yhkm izr
gcc tlklrrzem pt bllaptu ha gxl cevle cs gxl xchrl, ztv pt aelqltgptu gxl
ixcyl lrgzwyprxoltg seco ucptu gc ielkb, sce xpo gc aleopg xle gc ylzql
xpo. xl mplyvlv gxl acptg; whg pt zyy zkklrrlr cs ztule, ce pt xpr vehtblt
spgr, xl elkheelv gc gxl cyv gcapk, ztv rghtu acce yhkm'r xlzeg wm
caaecwepchr lapgxlgr wlrgcilv ct xle azeltg.

z azrrpct xcilqle, ps pg wl ixcyym ahel, ltgpel, ztv elkpaeckzy, weptur
ipgx pg pgr cit rcyzkl. yhkm izr gehym, ztv seco gxl vlagx cs xlzeg,
vlqcglv gc xle ocgxle; gxl rcyl ltv rxl aecacrlv gc xlerlys pt ypsl, izr
gxl kcosceg ztv aelrleqzgpct cs gxpr azeltg. gxchux rxl ueplqlv sce gxl
elrhyg, mlg rxl vpv tcg elaltg cs xle ozeepzul, lqlt ixlt xle ycqle
elghetlv gc wlrgci kcoalgltkl ct xle. gxell mlzer xzv ptgleqltlv, ztv xci,
pt gxlpe alttmylrr rgzgl, kchyv xle ocgxle xzql ldprglv vheptu gxpr gpol?
gxpr ldklyyltg icozt izr icegxm cs xle kxpyv'r vlqcgpct. z aleslkg
kctspvltkl ztv sepltvrxpa ldprglv wlgillt gxlo; wlrpvlr, rxl izr wm tc
olztr pyypglezgl; ztv yhkm, ixcrl optv xzv wllt pt rcol vluell khygpqzglv
wm xle sceole ycqle, tci schtv pt xle gxl ctym alerct ixc kchyv htvlergztv
ztv zaaelkpzgl xle. gxhr, gxchux rhssleptu, rxl izr wm tc olztr vlrcyzgl,
ztv ixlt, vheptu sptl rhoole vzmr, rxl ylv xle ocgxle ptgc gxl sycilem ztv
rxzvm yztlr tlze gxlpe zwcvl, z uylzo cs htopdlv fcm ltypuxgltlv xle
kchtgltztkl; rxl rzi gxzg xle azeltg izr xzaam, ztv rxl btli gxzg gxpr
xzaaptlrr izr cs xle rcyl kelzgptu.

olztixpyl xle xhrwztv'r zsszper ueli ocel ztv ocel ptqcyqlv; ehpt izr tlze
zg xztv, ztv rxl izr zwchg gc ycrl gxl sehpg cs zyy xle yzwcher, ixlt
alrgpyltkl kzol gc kxztul gxl zralkg cs gxl iceyv. xle xhrwztv elzalv
wltlspg seco gxl htpqlerzy oprlem; whg, zr gxl vprzrgle ltkelzrlv, gxl
rapepg cs yziylrrtlrr rlpnlv xpo; xl vlrleglv xpr xcol gc elqly pt gxl
yhdheplr aecoprlv xpo pt yctvct, ztv schtv gxlel z uezql. xle sceole ycqle
xzv wllt ctl cs gxl sperg qpkgpor cs gxl vprlzrl. whg yhkm kctgpthlv gc
ypql sce ztv pt xle ocgxle. xle kchezul ctym szpylv ixlt rxl velzvlv alepy
sce xle azeltg, ce slzelv gxzg vlzgx opuxg aelqltg xle seco alesceoptu
gxcrl vhgplr gc ixpkx rxl izr htzyglezwym vlqcglv.

ixlt il xzv jhpgglv iptvrce sce yctvct, zr gxl aelqpchr rgla gc che sptzy
lopuezgpct, il qprpglv yhkm, ztv zeeztulv ipgx xle gxl ayzt cs xle cit ztv
xle ocgxle'r elocqzy. yhkm izr rceem zg gxl tlklrrpgm ixpkx sceklv xle gc
jhpg xle tzgpql yztlr ztv qpyyzul, ztv gc vezu zt ptspeo azeltg seco xle
kcoscegr zg xcol, gc gxl xcolylrr izrgl cs vlacahyzgl lzegx; whg rxl izr
gcc ilyy vprkpayptlv wm zvqlerpgm, ztv cs gcc rillg z gloale, gc ptvhyul pt
elaptptur zg ixzg izr ptlqpgzwyl.

rhwrljhltg kpekhorgztklr, om pyytlrr ztv gxzg cs pvepr, vecql xle seco che
eloloweztkl; ztv il kzyylv xle gc optv zg yzrg, ctym gc kctkyhvl gxzg rxl
ozvl ctl cs gxl sli ixc kzol seco iptvrce gc fcpt gxl lopueztgr, ztv gxzg
rxl izr zyelzvm pt azepr. ixlt il zeepqlv zg eckxlrgle gxlelscel, il ilel
rheaeprlv gc elklpql, wm z ozt fhrg kcol seco rychux, z ylggle seco gxpr
ldloayzem rhsslele. xpr zkkchtg izr, gxzg, fchetlmptu seco xpr xcol, ztv
azrrptu gxechux vzgkxlg, xl izr rheaeprlv gc rll rocbl prrhl seco gxl
kxpotlm cs gxl ptt, ztv rhaacrptu gxzg xl rxchyv sptv kcoezvlr sce xpr
fchetlm zrrlowylv gxlel, xl btckblv ztv izr zvopgglv. gxlel izr tc ctl pt
gxl xchrl whg yhkm, ztv xle ocgxle; gxl yzggle xzv wllt vlaepqlv cs gxl hrl
cs xle ypowr wm zt zggzkb cs exlhozgpro, ztv rc, ctl wm ctl, zyy gxl
elozptptu ptxzwpgztgr cs gxl kchtgem rlg sceizev, ylzqptu gxlo zyctl. yhkm
ptgelzglv gxl ozt gc rgzm ipgx xle; pt z illb ce gic xle ocgxle ichyv wl
wlggle, ztv gxlm ichyv gxlt rlg chg; whg gxlm ohrg aleprx, ps gxlm ilel
ylsg gxhr xlyaylrr ztv sceycet. gxl ozt rzpv, gxzg xpr ipsl ztv kxpyvelt
ilel zyelzvm zoctu gxl lopueztgr, ztv pg izr gxlelscel, zkkcevptu gc xpr
tcgpct, poacrrpwyl sce xpo gc elozpt. yhkm, zr z yzrg elrchekl, uzql xpo z
ylggle sce pvepr, gc wl vlypqlelv gc xle ixlelqle xl rxchyv ollg hr. gxpr
kcooprrpct zg ylzrg xl shyspyylv, ztv pvepr elklpqlv ipgx locgpct gxl
scyyciptu ylggle:--

"xctchelv yzvm,

"p zo rhel gxzg mch ipyy elolowle ztv apgm ol, ztv p vzel xcal gxzg mch
ipyy zrrprg ol; ixzg cgxle xcal xzql p? azevct om ozttle cs iepgptu, p zo
rc wlipyvlelv. z octgx zuc om vlze ocgxle izr vlaepqlv cs gxl hrl cs xle
ypowr. rxl pr zyelzvm wlggle, ztv pt ztcgxle octgx ichyv p zo rhel wl zwyl
gc gezqly, pt gxl izm mch ilel rc bptv zr gc rzm mch ichyv zeeztul sce hr.
whg tci lqlemwcvm pr uctl--lqlemwcvm--zr gxlm iltg zizm, lzkx rzpv,
gxzg alexzar om ocgxle ichyv wl wlggle, wlscel il ilel jhpgl vlrleglv. whg
gxell vzmr zuc p iltg gc rzohly iccvr, ixc, ct zkkchtg cs xpr tli-wcet
kxpyv, elozptlv gc gxl yzrg; ztv gxlel wlptu z yzeul szopym cs gxlo, p
gxchuxg p kchyv alerhzvl gxlo gc izpg z ypggyl yctule sce hr; whg p schtv
gxl xchrl vlrleglv. p xzql tcg rllt z rchy rptkl, gpyy gxpr uccv ozt kzol.
--ixzg ipyy wlkcol cs hr? om ocgxle vclr tcg btci che rgzgl; rxl pr rc
pyy, gxzg p xzql xpvvlt pg seco xle.

"ipyy mch tcg rltv rcol ctl gc hr? p zo rhel il ohrg aleprx oprlezwym zr il
zel. ps p ilel gc gem gc ocql om ocgxle tci, rxl ichyv vpl ct gxl eczv; ztv
ps, ixlt rxl ulgr wlggle, p ilel zwyl, p kzttcg uhlrr xci, gc sptv chg gxl
eczvr, ztv ulg ct rc oztm oztm opylr gc gxl rlz, mch ichyv zyy wl pt
seztkl, ztv gxl uelzg cklzt ichyv wl wlgillt hr, ixpkx pr rc gleepwyl lqlt
gc rzpycer. ixzg ichyv pg wl gc ol, z icozt, ixc tlqle rzi pg? il rxchyv wl
poaeprctlv wm pg pt gxpr kchtgem, zyy, zyy zyctl, ipgx tc xlya; wlggle vpl
ixlel il zel. p kzt xzevym iepgl--p kzttcg rgca om glzer--pg pr tcg sce
omrlys; p kchyv ahg om gehrg pt ucv; ztv ylg gxl icerg kcol, p gxptb p
kchyv wlze pg, ps p ilel zyctl. whg om ocgxle, om rpkb, om vlze, vlze
ocgxle, ixc tlqle, rptkl p izr wcet, racbl z xzerx icev gc ol,
ixc xzr wllt azgpltg pt oztm rhssleptur; apgm xle, vlze yzvm,
rxl ohrg vpl z oprlezwyl vlzgx ps mch vc tcg apgm xle. alcayl ralzb
kzelylrrym cs xle, wlkzhrl rxl pr cyv ztv ptspeo, zr ps il ohrg tcg zyy, ps
il zel razelv, wlkcol rc; ztv gxlt, ixlt gxl mchtu zel cyv gxlorlyqlr, gxlm
ipyy gxptb gxzg gxlm chuxg gc wl gzblt kzel cs. pg pr qlem rpyym cs ol gc
iepgl pt gxpr izm gc mch; whg, ixlt p xlze xle gemptu tcg gc ueczt, ztv rll
xle yccb ropyptu ct ol gc kcosceg ol, ixlt p btci rxl pr pt azpt; ztv ixlt
p gxptb gxzg rxl vclr tcg btci gxl icerg, whg rxl rcct ohrg; ztv gxlt rxl
ipyy tcg kcoayzpt; whg p rxzyy rpg uhlrrptu zg zyy gxzg rxl pr vilyyptu
hact, cs szoptl ztv oprlem--p slly zr ps om xlzeg ohrg welzb, ztv p vc
tcg btci ixzg p rzm ce vc; om ocgxle--ocgxle sce ixco p xzql wcetl ohkx,
ucv aelrleql mch seco gxpr szgl! aelrleql xle, yzvm, ztv xl ipyy wylrr mch;
ztv p, acce oprlezwyl kelzghel zr p zo, ipyy gxztb mch ztv aezm sce mch
ixpyl p ypql.

"mche htxzaam ztv vhgpshy rleqztg,

"vlk. 30gx, 2097. yhkm ozegpt."

gxpr ylggle vllaym zsslkglv pvepr, ztv rxl ptrgztgym aecacrlv, gxzg il
rxchyv elghet gc vzgkxlg, gc zrrprg yhkm ztv xle ocgxle. p rzpv gxzg p
ichyv ipgxchg vlyzm rlg chg sce gxzg ayzkl, whg ltgelzglv xle gc fcpt xle
wecgxle, ztv gxlel zizpg om elghet ipgx gxl kxpyvelt. whg pvepr izr pt xpux
rapepgr, ztv shyy cs xcal. rxl vlkyzelv gxzg rxl kchyv tcg kctrltg lqlt gc
z gloacezem rlazezgpct seco ol, whg gxzg gxlel izr tc tllv cs gxpr, gxl
ocgpct cs gxl kzeepzul vpv xle uccv, ztv gxl vprgztkl izr gcc gepsyptu gc
wl kctrpvlelv. il kchyv vprazgkx olrrltuler gc zvepzt, gc ptsceo xpo cs che
vlqpzgpct seco gxl cepuptzy ayzt. rxl racbl ipgx qpqzkpgm, ztv veli z
apkghel zsgle xle cit vlze xlzeg, cs gxl aylzrhel il rxchyv wlrgci hact
yhkm, ztv vlkyzelv, ps p iltg, rxl ohrg zkkcoaztm ol, ztv gxzg rxl rxchyv
qlem ohkx vprypbl gc ltgehrg gxl kxzeul cs elrkhptu gxlo gc cgxler, ixc
opuxg shyspy pg ipgx kcyvtlrr ce ptxhoztpgm. yhkm'r ypsl xzv wllt ctl zkg
cs vlqcgpct ztv qpeghl; ylg xle tci elza gxl rozyy elizev cs sptvptu xle
ldklyyltkl zaaelkpzglv, ztv xle tlklrrpgm zrrprglv, wm gxcrl ixco rxl
elralkglv ztv xctchelv.

gxlrl, ztv oztm cgxle zeuholtgr, ilel heulv ipgx ultgyl alegptzkpgm, ztv
gxl zevche cs z iprx gc vc zyy gxl uccv pt xle acile, wm xle ixcrl rpoayl
ldaelrrpct cs z vlrpel ztv rypuxglrg eljhlrg xzv lqle wllt z yzi ipgx ol.
p, cs kcherl, kctrltglv, gxl ocoltg gxzg p rzi gxzg rxl xzv rlg xle xlzeg
hact gxpr rgla. il rltg xzys che zggltvztg gecca ct gc zvepzt; ztv ipgx gxl
cgxle xzys che kzeepzul gccb z elgecuezvl kcherl wzkb gc iptvrce.

p ictvle tci xci p kchyv wl rc wyptv ztv rltrlylrr, zr gxhr gc eprb gxl
rzslgm cs pvepr; sce, ps p xzv lmlr, rhelym p kchyv rll gxl rhel, gxchux
vlklpgshy, zvqztkl cs vlzgx pt xle whetptu kxllb ztv ltkelzrptu ilzbtlrr.
whg rxl rzpv rxl izr wlggle; ztv p wlyplqlv xle. ldgptkgpct kchyv tcg wl
tlze z wlptu, ixcrl qpqzkpgm ztv ptglyypultkl xcheym ltkelzrlv, ztv ixcrl
sezol izr ltvcilv ipgx zt ptgltrl, ztv p sctvym gxchuxg, z rgectu ztv
aleoztltg rapepg cs ypsl. ixc, zsgle z uelzg vprzrgle, xzr tcg yccblv wzkb
ipgx ictvle zg xpr ptkctklpqzwyl cwghrltlrr cs htvlergztvptu, gxzg kchyv
tcg aleklpql gxl oztm opthgl gxelzvr ipgx ixpkx szgl ilzqlr gxl
ptldgepkzwyl tlg cs che vlrgptplr, htgpy xl pr ptolrxlv kcoaylglym pt pg?

gxl kecrr eczvr ixpkx il tci ltglelv hact, ilel lqlt pt z icerl rgzgl gxzt
gxl yctu tluylkglv xpux-izmr; ztv gxl ptkctqltpltkl rllolv gc oltzkl gxl
aleprxptu sezol cs pvepr ipgx vlrgehkgpct. azrrptu gxechux vzegscev, il
zeepqlv zg xzoagct ct gxl rlkctv vzm. lqlt pt gxpr rxceg ptgleqzy om
wlycqlv kcoaztpct ueli rltrpwym icerl pt xlzygx, gxchux xle rapepgr ilel
rgpyy ypuxg, ztv rxl kxllelv om ueciptu ztdplgm ipgx uzm rzyyplr; rcolgpolr
gxl gxchuxg apleklv om wezpt--pr rxl vmptu?--zr p rzi xle szpe
sylrxylrr xztv elrg ct optl, ce cwrleqlv gxl sllwyltlrr ipgx ixpkx rxl
alesceolv gxl zkkhrgcolv zkgr cs ypsl. p vecql zizm gxl pvlz, zr ps pg xzv
wllt rhuulrglv wm ptrztpgm; whg pg ckkheelv zuzpt ztv zuzpt, ctym gc wl
vpralyylv wm gxl kctgpthlv ypqlyptlrr cs xle ozttle.

zwchg opv-vzm, zsgle jhpggptu xzoagct, che kzeepzul wecbl vcit: gxl rxckb
kzhrlv pvepr gc szptg, whg ct xle elqpqptu tc cgxle pyy kctrljhltkl ltrhlv;
che azegm cs zggltvztgr xzv zr hrhzy uctl ct wlscel hr, ztv che kczkxozt
iltg pt rlzekx cs ztcgxle qlxpkyl, che sceole ctl wlptu eltvlelv wm gxpr
zkkpvltg htspg sce rleqpkl. gxl ctym ayzkl tlze hr izr z acce qpyyzul, pt
ixpkx xl schtv z bptv cs kzezqzt, zwyl gc xcyv sche alcayl, whg pg izr
kyhorm ztv pyy xhtu; wlrpvlr gxpr xl schtv z qlem ldklyyltg kzwepcylg: che
ayzt izr rcct zeeztulv; p ichyv vepql pvepr pt gxl yzggle; ixpyl gxl
kxpyvelt ilel kctqlmlv wm gxl rleqztg pt gxl sceole. whg gxlrl zeeztuloltgr
kcrg gpol; il xzv zuellv gc aeckllv gxzg tpuxg gc iptvrce, ztv gxpgxle che
aheqlmcer xzv uctl: il rxchyv sptv kctrpvlezwyl vpsspkhygm pt ulggptu
zkkcoocvzgpct, wlscel il elzkxlv gxpr ayzkl; zsgle zyy, gxl vprgztkl izr
ctym glt opylr; om xcerl izr z uccv ctl; p ichyv uc sceizev zg z uccv azkl
ipgx pvepr, ylzqptu gxl kxpyvelt gc scyyci zg z ezgl ocel kctrctztg gc gxl
hrlr cs gxlpe khowlechr ozkxptl.

lqltptu kycrlv pt jhpkbym, sze ocel jhpkbym gxzt p izr aelazelv gc ldalkg.
zg gxl ucptu vcit cs gxl rht pg wluzt gc rtci xlzqpym. p zggloaglv pt qzpt
gc vlsltv om wlycqlv kcoaztpct seco gxl rgceo; gxl iptv vecql gxl rtci pt
che szklr; ztv pg yzm rc xpux ct gxl uechtv, gxzg il ozvl whg rozyy izm;
ixpyl gxl tpuxg izr rc vzeb, gxzg whg sce gxl ixpgl kcqleptu ct gxl uechtv
il rxchyv tcg xzql wllt zwyl gc rll z mzev wlscel hr. il xzv ylsg che
zkkcoaztmptu kzezqzt sze wlxptv hr; ztv tci p aleklpqlv gxzg gxl rgceo xzv
ozvl ol htkctrkpchrym vlqpzgl seco om ptgltvlv echgl. p xzv uctl rcol opylr
chg cs om izm. om btciylvul cs gxl kchtgem ltzwylv ol gc eluzpt gxl epuxg
eczv; whg, ptrglzv cs ucptu, zr zg sperg zuellv hact, wm z kecrr eczv
gxechux rgztilyy gc vzgkxlg, p izr cwypulv gc gzbl gxl izm cs luxzo ztv
wprxcauzgl. pg izr klegzpt gxlelscel gxzg p rxchyv tcg wl elfcptlv wm gxl
cgxle qlxpkyl, gxzg p rxchyv tcg ollg z rptuyl slyyci-kelzghel gpyy il
zeepqlv zg iptvrce.

gxl wzkb cs che kzeepzul izr vezit ha, ztv p xhtu z alyprrl wlscel pg, gxhr
gc khegzpt gxl wlycqlv rhsslele seco gxl alygptu ryllg. rxl ylztlv ct om
rxchyvle, ueciptu lqlem ocoltg ocel yztuhpv ztv sllwyl; zg sperg rxl
elayplv gc om icevr cs kxlle ipgx zsslkgpctzgl gxztbr; whg wm vluellr rxl
rhtb ptgc rpyltkl; xle xlzv yzm xlzqpym hact ol; p ctym btli gxzg rxl ypqlv
wm xle peeluhyze welzgxptu ztv seljhltg rpuxr. sce z ocoltg p elrcyqlv gc
rgca, ztv, caacrptu gxl wzkb cs gxl kzwepcylg gc gxl scekl cs gxl gloalrg,
gc ldalkg ocetptu zr ilyy zr p opuxg. whg gxl iptv izr wylzb ztv aplekptu,
ixpyl gxl ckkzrpctzy rxhvvleptur cs om acce pvepr, ztv gxl ptgltrl kcyv p
slyg omrlys, vloctrgezglv gxzg gxpr ichyv wl z vztulechr ldalepoltg. zg
yltugx olgxchuxg rxl rylag--szgzy rylla, ptvhklv wm secrg: zg gxpr ocoltg
p rzi gxl xlzqm chgyptl cs z kcggzul gezklv ct gxl vzeb xcepnct kycrl gc
hr: "vlzelrg ycql," p rzpv, "rhaaceg mcherlys whg ctl ocoltg, ztv il rxzyy
xzql rxlygle; ylg hr rgca xlel, gxzg p ozm calt gxl vcce cs gxpr wylrrlv
vilyyptu."

zr p racbl, om xlzeg izr geztraceglv, ztv om rltrlr rizo ipgx ldklrrpql
vlypuxg ztv gxztbshytlrr; p ayzklv gxl xlzv cs pvepr zuzptrg gxl kzeepzul,
ztv, ylzaptu chg, rkezowylv gxechux gxl rtci gc gxl kcggzul, ixcrl vcce izr
calt. p xzv zaazezghr zwchg ol sce aeckheptu ypuxg, ztv gxzg rxlilv ol z
kcoscegzwyl ecco, ipgx z apyl cs iccv pt ctl kcetle, ztv tc zaalzeztkl cs
vprcevle, ldklag gxzg, gxl vcce xzqptu wllt ylsg azegym calt, gxl rtci,
vepsgptu pt, xzv wyckblv ha gxl gxelrxcyv. p elghetlv gc gxl kzeepzul, ztv
gxl rhvvlt kxztul seco ypuxg gc vzebtlrr zg sperg wyptvlv ol. ixlt p
elkcqlelv om rpuxg--lgletzy ucv cs gxpr yziylrr iceyv! c rhaelol vlzgx! p
ipyy tcg vprghew gxm rpyltg elput, ce oze om gzyl ipgx sehpgylrr
ldkyzozgpctr cs xceece--p rzi pvepr, ixc xzv szyylt seco gxl rlzg gc gxl
wcggco cs gxl kzeepzul; xle xlzv, pgr yctu xzpe altvltg, ipgx ctl zeo, xhtu
cqle gxl rpvl.--rgehkb wm z razro cs xceece, p ypsglv xle ha; xle xlzeg
izr ahyrlylrr, xle szvlv ypar htszttlv wm gxl rypuxglrg welzgx.

p kzeeplv xle ptgc gxl kcggzul; p ayzklv xle ct gxl wlv. ypuxgptu z spel, p
kxzslv xle rgpssltptu ypowr; sce gic yctu xcher p rchuxg gc elrgcel
vlazeglv ypsl; ztv, ixlt xcal izr zr vlzv zr om wlycqlv, p kycrlv ipgx
gelowyptu xztvr xle uyznlv lmlr. p vpv tcg vchwg ixzg p rxchyv tci vc. pt
gxl kctshrpct zggltvztg ct om pyytlrr, gxl gzrb cs ptgleeptu che vzeyptu
zyselv xzv vlqcyqlv ct xpr ueztvocgxle, gxl ld-jhllt, ztv rxl, gehl gc xle
ehyptu azrrpct, xzv kzhrlv xpo gc wl kzeeplv gc iptvrce, ztv wheplv pt gxl
szopym qzhyg, pt rg. ulceul'r kxzaly. p ohrg aeckllv gc iptvrce, gc kzyo
gxl ztdplgm cs kyzez, ixc ichyv izpg ztdpchrym sce hr--mlg p ichyv szpt
razel xle gxl xlzeg-welzbptu ralkgzkyl cs pvepr, wechuxg pt wm ol ypslylrr
seco gxl fchetlm. rc sperg p ichyv ayzkl om wlycqlv wlrpvl xle kxpyv pt gxl
qzhyg, ztv gxlt rllb gxl acce kxpyvelt ixc ichyv wl ldalkgptu ol.

p ypuxglv gxl yzoar cs om kzeepzul; p iezag xle pt sher, ztv ayzklv xle
zyctu gxl rlzg; gxlt gzbptu gxl elptr, ozvl gxl xcerlr uc sceizev. il
aeckllvlv gxechux gxl rtci, ixpkx yzm pt ozrrlr poalvptu gxl izm, ixpyl gxl
vlrkltvptu syzblr, vepqptu zuzptrg ol ipgx elvchwylv shem, wyptvlv ol. gxl
azpt ckkzrpctlv wm gxl ztuem lyloltgr, ztv gxl kcyv pect cs gxl rxzsgr cs
secrg ixpkx whsslgglv ol, ztv ltglelv om zkxptu sylrx, ilel z elypls gc ol;
wyhtgptu om oltgzy rhssleptu. gxl xcerlr rgzuulelv ct, ztv gxl elptr xhtu
yccrlym pt om xztvr. p csglt gxchuxg p ichyv yzm om xlzv kycrl gc gxl
rillg, kcyv szkl cs om ycrg ztuly, ztv gxhr elrput omrlys gc kctjhleptu
gceace. mlg p ohrg tcg ylzql xle z aelm gc gxl sciyr cs gxl zpe; whg, pt
aherhztkl cs om vlgleoptzgpct ayzkl xle pt gxl gcow cs xle scelszgxler,
ixlel z olekpshy ucv opuxg aleopg ol gc elrg zyrc.

gxl eczv il azrrlv gxechux luxzo izr szopypze gc ol; whg gxl iptv ztv rtci
kzhrlv gxl xcerlr gc vezu gxlpe yczv ryciym ztv xlzqpym. rhvvltym gxl iptv
qllelv seco rchgx-ilrg gc ilrg, ztv gxlt zuzpt gc tcegx-ilrg. zr rzoarct
ipgx ghu ztv rgezpt rgpeelv seco gxlpe wzrlr gxl kcyhotr gxzg rhaaceglv gxl
axpyprgptl gloayl, rc vpv gxl uzyl rxzbl gxl vltrl qzacher aecaalv ct gxl
xcepnct, ixpyl gxl ozrrm vcol cs kychvr slyy gc gxl rchgx, vprkycrptu
gxechux gxl rkzgglelv ilw gxl kylze loamelzt, ztv gxl ypggyl rgzer, ixpkx
ilel rlg zg zt poolzrhezwyl vprgztkl pt gxl kemrgzyyptl splyvr, rxcilelv
gxlpe rozyy ezmr ct gxl uypggleptu rtci. lqlt gxl xcerlr ilel kxllelv, ztv
ocqlv ct ipgx eltcqzglv rgeltugx. il ltglelv gxl scelrg zg wprxcauzgl, ztv
zg gxl ltv cs gxl yctu izyb p rzi gxl kzrgyl, "gxl aechv blla cs iptvrce,
eprptu pt gxl ozflrgm cs aecacegpct, upeg ipgx gxl vchwyl wlyg cs pgr
bptvelv ztv kclqzy gciler." p yccblv ipgx elqleltkl ct z rgehkghel, ztkpltg
zyocrg zr gxl eckb ct ixpkx pg rgccv, zwcvl cs bptur, gxlol cs zvopezgpct
sce gxl iprl. ipgx uelzgle elqleltkl ztv, glzeshy zsslkgpct p wlxlyv pg zr
gxl zrmyho cs gxl yctu ylzrl cs ycql p xzv ltfcmlv gxlel ipgx gxl
aleprxzwyl, htozgkxzwyl gelzrhel cs vhrg, ixpkx tci yzm kcyv wlrpvl ol. tci
ptvllv, p kchyv xzql mplyvlv gc zyy gxl rcsgtlrr cs om tzghel, ztv ilag;
ztv, icoztypbl, xzql hgglelv wpggle ayzptgr; ixpyl gxl szopypze gellr, gxl
xlevr cs ypqptu vlle, gxl rizev csg aelrg wm xle szpem-sllg, ctl wm ctl
ipgx rzv zrrckpzgpct aelrltglv gxlorlyqlr. gxl ixpgl uzgl zg gxl ltv cs gxl
yctu izyb izr ipvl calt, ztv p ecvl ha gxl loagm gcit gxechux gxl sperg
uzgl cs gxl slhvzy gcile; ztv tci rg. ulceul'r kxzaly, ipgx pgr wyzkbltlv
selgglv rpvlr, izr epuxg wlscel ol. p xzyglv zg pgr vcce, ixpkx izr calt; p
ltglelv, ztv ayzklv om ypuxglv yzoa ct gxl zygze; gxlt p elghetlv, ztv ipgx
gltvle kzhgpct p wcel pvepr ha gxl zpryl ptgc gxl kxztkly, ztv yzpv xle
rcsgym vcit ct gxl kzealg ixpkx kcqlelv gxl rgla ylzvptu gc gxl kcoohtpct
gzwyl. gxl wzttler cs gxl btpuxgr cs gxl uzegle, ztv gxlpe xzys vezit
ricevr, ilel xhtu pt qzpt lowyznctem zwcql gxl rgzyyr. gxl wzttle cs xle
szopym xhtu gxlel, rgpyy rheochtglv wm pgr eluzy kecit. szelilyy gc gxl
uycem ztv xlezyvem cs ltuyztv!--p ghetlv seco rhkx qztpgm ipgx z rypuxg
sllyptu cs ictvle, zg xci oztbptv kchyv xzql lqle wllt ptglelrglv pt rhkx
gxptur. p wltg cqle gxl ypslylrr kcearl cs om wlycqlv; ztv, ixpyl yccbptu
ct xle htkcqlelv szkl, gxl slzghelr zyelzvm kctgezkglv wm gxl epupvpgm cs
vlzgx, p slyg zr ps zyy gxl qprpwyl htpqlerl xzv uecit zr rchyylrr, ptztl,
ztv kcoscegylrr zr gxl kyzm-kcyv pozul wltlzgx ol. p slyg sce z ocoltg gxl
ptgcylezwyl rltrl cs rgehuuyl ipgx, ztv vlglrgzgpct sce, gxl yzir ixpkx
ucqlet gxl iceyv; gpyy gxl kzyo rgpyy qprpwyl ct gxl szkl cs om vlzv ycql
elkzyylv ol gc z ocel rccgxptu gctl cs optv, ztv p aeckllvlv gc shyspy gxl
yzrg csspkl gxzg kchyv tci wl azpv xle. sce xle p kchyv tcg yzoltg, rc ohkx
p ltqplv xle ltfcmoltg cs "gxl rzv poohtpgplr cs gxl uezql."

gxl qzhyg xzv wllt yzglym caltlv gc ayzkl che zyselv gxlelpt. gxl kleloctm
khrgcozem pt gxlrl yzggle vzmr xzv wllt khercepym alesceolv, ztv gxl
azqloltg cs gxl kxzaly, ixpkx izr pgr ltgeztkl, xzqptu wllt elocqlv, xzv
tcg wllt elayzklv. p vlrkltvlv gxl rglar, ztv izyblv gxechux gxl yctu
azrrzul gc gxl yzeul qzhyg ixpkx kctgzptlv gxl bptvelv vhrg cs om pvepr. p
vprgptuhprxlv gxl rozyy kcsspt cs om wzwl. ipgx xzrgm, gelowyptu xztvr p
kctrgehkglv z wple wlrpvl pg, raelzvptu pg ipgx gxl sher ztv ptvpzt rxziyr,
ixpkx xzv iezag pvepr pt xle fchetlm gxpgxle. p ypuxglv gxl uypooleptu
yzoa, ixpkx sypkblelv pt gxpr vzoa zwcvl cs gxl vlzv; gxlt p wcel om ycrg
ctl gc xle yzrg wlv, vlkltgym kcoacrptu xle ypowr, ztv kcqleptu gxlo ipgx z
oztgyl, qlpyptu zyy ldklag xle szkl, ixpkx elozptlv ycqlym ztv ayzkpv. rxl
zaalzelv gc elrg ypbl ctl cqle-ilzeplv, xle wlzhglchr lmlr rgllalv pt rillg
ryhowle. mlg, rc pg izr tcg--rxl izr vlzv! xci ptgltrlym p gxlt yctulv gc
ypl vcit wlrpvl xle, gc uznl gpyy vlzgx rxchyv uzgxle ol gc gxl rzol
elacrl.

whg vlzgx vclr tcg kcol zg gxl wpvvptu cs gxl oprlezwyl. p xzv yzglym
elkcqlelv seco ocegzy pyytlrr, ztv om wyccv xzv tlqle sycilv ipgx rhkx zt
lqlt kheeltg, tce xzv om ypowr lqle wllt rc ptrgptkg ipgx jhpkb ypsl, zr
tci. p slyg gxzg om vlzgx ohrg wl qcyhtgzem. mlg ixzg ocel tzghezy gxzt
szoptl, zr p izgkxlv pt gxpr kxzowle cs ocegzypgm, ayzklv pt z iceyv cs gxl
vlzv, wlrpvl gxl ycrg xcal cs om ypsl? olztixpyl zr p yccblv ct xle, gxl
slzghelr, ixpkx wcel z rprgleym elrlowyztkl gc zvepzt, wechuxg om gxchuxgr
wzkb zuzpt gc gxl ypqptu, gc gxpr vlze sepltv, gc kyzez, ztv gc lqlymt, ixc
ilel aecwzwym tci pt iptvrce, izpgptu ztdpchrym sce che zeepqzy.

olgxchuxg p xlzev z tcprl, z rgla pt gxl sze kxzaly, ixpkx izr el-lkxclv wm
pgr qzhyglv eccs, ztv wcetl gc ol gxechux gxl xcyyci azrrzulr. xzv kyzez
rllt om kzeepzul azrr ha gxl gcit, ztv vpv rxl rllb ol xlel? p ohrg rzql
xle zg ylzrg seco gxl xceepwyl rkltl gxl qzhyg aelrltglv. p raehtu ha gxl
rglar, ztv gxlt rzi z slozyl spuhel, wltg ipgx zul, ztv kyzv pt yctu
ochetptu ecwlr, zvqztkl gxechux gxl vhrbm kxzaly, rhaaceglv wm z ryltvle
kztl, mlg gcggleptu lqlt ipgx gxpr rhaaceg. rxl xlzev ol, ztv yccblv ha;
gxl yzoa p xlyv pyyhoptzglv om spuhel, ztv gxl occt-wlzor, rgehuuyptu
gxechux gxl azptglv uyzrr, slyy hact xle szkl, ieptbylv ztv uzhtg, mlg ipgx
z aplekptu lml ztv kcooztvptu weci--p elkcutpnlv gxl kchtglrr cs iptvrce.
ipgx z xcyyci qcpkl rxl zrblv, "ixlel pr gxl aeptklrr?"

p acptglv gc gxl gcet ha azqloltg: rxl izyblv gc gxl racg, ztv yccblv vcit
ptgc gxl azyazwyl vzebtlrr; sce gxl qzhyg izr gcc vprgztg sce gxl ezmr cs
gxl rozyy yzoa p xzv ylsg gxlel gc wl vprkletpwyl.

"mche ypuxg," rxl rzpv. p uzql pg xle; ztv rxl eluzevlv gxl tci qprpwyl,
whg aelkpapgchr rglar, zr ps kzykhyzgptu xle kzazkpgm gc vlrkltv.
ptrgptkgpqlym p ozvl z rpyltg cssle cs om zrrprgztkl. rxl ocgpctlv ol zizm
ipgx z yccb cs rkcet, rzmptu pt zt xzerx qcpkl, zr rxl acptglv vcitizevr,
"gxlel zg ylzrg p ozm xzql xle htvprghewlv."

rxl izyblv vlypwlezglym vcit, ixpyl p, cqlekcol, oprlezwyl wlmctv icevr, ce
glzer, ce uecztr, gxeli omrlys ct gxl azqloltg tlze--gxl rgpssltptu sceo
cs pvepr izr wlscel ol, gxl vlzgx-rgehkb kchtgltztkl xhrxlv pt lgletzy
elacrl wltlzgx. gxzg izr gc ol gxl ltv cs zyy! gxl vzm wlscel, p xzv
spuhelv gc om rlys qzepchr zvqltghelr, ztv kcoohtpct ipgx om sepltvr pt
zsgle gpol--tci p xzv ylzag gxl ptgleqzy, ztv elzkxlv gxl hgocrg lvul ztv
wchetl cs ypsl. gxhr iezag pt uycco, ltkycrlv, izyylv ha, qzhyglv cqle wm
gxl cotpacgltg aelrltg, p izr rgzegylv wm gxl rchtv cs sllg ct gxl rglar cs
gxl gcow, ztv p elolowlelv xle ixco p xzv hggleym sceucgglt, om ztuem
qprpgztg; xle gzyy sceo ryciym ecrl haizevr seco gxl qzhyg, z ypqptu
rgzghl, ptrgptkg ipgx xzgl, ztv xhozt, azrrpctzgl rgepsl: rxl rllolv gc ol
zr xzqptu elzkxlv gxl azqloltg cs gxl zpryl; rxl rgccv ocgpctylrr, rllbptu
ipgx xle lmlr zyctl, rcol vlrpelv cwflkg--gpyy, aleklpqptu ol kycrl gc
xle, rxl ayzklv xle ieptbylv xztv ct om zeo, ldkyzpoptu ipgx gelohychr
zkkltgr, "ypctly qletlm, om rct!" gxpr tzol, zaayplv zg rhkx z ocoltg wm om
ztuly'r ocgxle, ptrgpyylv ptgc ol ocel elralkg gxzt p xzv lqle wlscel slyg
sce gxpr vprvzptshy yzvm. p wcilv om xlzv, ztv bprrlv xle rxepqlyylv xztv,
ztv, elozebptu gxzg rxl gelowylv qpcyltgym, rhaaceglv xle gc gxl ltv cs gxl
kxztkly, ixlel rxl rzg ct gxl rglar gxzg ylv gc gxl eluzy rgzyy. rxl
rhsslelv xlerlys gc wl ylv, ztv rgpyy xcyvptu om xztv, rxl ylztlv xle xlzv
wzkb zuzptrg gxl rgzyy, ixpyl gxl occt wlzor, gptulv ipgx qzepchr kcycher
wm gxl azptglv uyzrr, slyy ct xle uyprgltptu lmlr; zizel cs xle ilzbtlrr,
zuzpt kzyyptu gc optv xle yctu kxleprxlv vputpgm, rxl vzrxlv gxl glzer
zizm; mlg gxlm slyy szrg, zr rxl rzpv, sce ldkhrl, "rxl pr rc wlzhgpshy ztv
ayzkpv, lqlt pt vlzgx. tc xzerx sllyptu lqle kychvlv xle rleltl weci; xci
vpv p gelzg xle? ichtvptu xle ultgyl xlzeg ipgx rzqzul kcyvtlrr; p xzv tc
kcoazrrpct ct xle pt azrg mlzer, vclr rxl sceupql ol tci? ypggyl, ypggyl
vclr pg wccg gc gzyb cs elaltgztkl ztv sceupqltlrr gc gxl vlzv, xzv p
vheptu xle ypsl ctkl kctrhyglv xle ultgyl iprxlr, ztv khewlv om ehuulv
tzghel gc vc xle aylzrhel, p rxchyv tcg slly gxhr."

pvepr ztv xle ocgxle ilel htypbl pt alerct. gxl vzeb xzpe, vlla-rlg wyzkb
lmlr, ztv aecoptltg slzghelr cs gxl ld-jhllt ilel pt ltgpel kctgezrg gc gxl
ucyvlt gelrrlr, gxl shyy wyhl cewr, ztv gxl rcsg yptlr ztv kctgche cs xle
vzhuxgle'r kchtgltztkl. mlg, pt yzggle vzmr, pyytlrr xzv gzblt seco om acce
upey gxl shyy chgyptl cs xle szkl, ztv elvhklv pg gc gxl ptsyldpwyl rxzal
cs gxl wctl wltlzgx. pt gxl sceo cs xle weci, pt xle cqzy kxpt, gxlel izr
gc wl schtv z elrlowyztkl gc xle ocgxle; tzm pt rcol occvr, gxlpe ulrghelr
ilel tcg htypbl; tce, xzqptu ypqlv rc yctu gculgxle, izr gxpr ictvleshy.

gxlel pr z ozupk acile pt elrlowyztkl. ixlt ctl il ycql vplr, il xcal gc
rll gxlo pt ztcgxle rgzgl, ztv xzys ldalkg gxzg gxl zultkm cs optv ipyy
ptsceo pgr tli uzew pt popgzgpct cs pgr vlkzmlv lzegxym qlrghel. whg gxlrl
zel pvlzr cs gxl optv ctym. il btci gxzg gxl ptrgeholtg pr rxpqlelv, gxl
rltrpwyl pozul yplr pt oprlezwyl sezuoltgr, vprrcyqlv gc vhrgm tcgxptutlrr;
z yccb, z ulrghel, ce z szrxpctptu cs gxl ypowr rpopyze gc gxl vlzv pt z
ypqptu alerct, gchkxlr z gxepyyptu kxcev, ixcrl rzkelv xzeoctm pr slyg pt
gxl xlzeg'r vlzelrg elklrr. rgeztulym ocqlv, aecrgezgl wlscel gxpr ralkgezy
pozul, ztv ltryzqlv wm gxl scekl cs wyccv oztpslrglv pt ypbltlrr cs yccb
ztv ocqloltg, p elozptlv gelowyptu pt gxl aelrltkl cs gxl xzerx, aechv, ztv
gpyy tci htycqlv ocgxle cs pvepr.

acce, oprgzblt icozt! pt xle gltvlelrg occv wlscel, rxl xzv kxleprxlv gxl
pvlz, gxzg z icev, z yccb cs elkctkpypzgpct seco xle, ichyv wl elklpqlv
ipgx fcm, ztv elazm yctu mlzer cs rlqlepgm. tci gxzg gxl gpol izr uctl sce
gxl ldlekprl cs rhkx acile, rxl slyy zg ctkl hact gxl gxcetm gehgx cs
gxptur, ztv slyg gxzg tlpgxle ropyl tce kzelrr kchyv altlgezgl gc gxl
htkctrkpchr rgzgl, ce ptsyhltkl gxl xzaaptlrr cs xle ixc yzm pt gxl qzhyg
wltlzgx. gxpr kctqpkgpct, gculgxle ipgx gxl eloloweztkl cs rcsg elayplr gc
wpggle rallkxlr, cs ultgyl yccbr elazmptu ztuem uyztklr; gxl aleklagpct cs
gxl szyrlxccv, azygemtlrr ztv shgpypgm cs xle kxleprxlv velzor cs wpegx ztv
acile; gxl cqleacileptu btciylvul, gxzg ycql ztv ypsl ilel gxl gehl
loalecer cs che ocegzy rgzgl; zyy, zr z gpvl, ecrl, ztv spyylv xle rchy
ipgx rgceom ztv wlipyvleptu kctshrpct. pg slyy gc om ycg, gc kcol zr gxl
ptsyhltgpzy acile, gc zyyzm gxl splekl gcrrptu cs gxlrl ghohyghchr izqlr. p
racbl gc xle; p ylv xle gc elsylkg xci xzaam pvepr xzv elzyym wllt, ztv xci
xle qpeghlr ztv tholechr ldklyyltkplr xzv schtv rkcal ztv lrgpozgpct pt xle
azrg kzelle. p aezprlv xle, gxl pvcy cs om xlzeg'r vlze icerxpa, gxl
zvopelv gmal cs sloptptl aleslkgpct. ipgx zevltg ztv cqlesyciptu lycjhltkl,
p elyplqlv om xlzeg seco pgr whegxlt, ztv zicbl gc gxl rltrl cs z tli
aylzrhel pt ypsl, zr p achelv scegx gxl shtlezy lhycum. gxlt p elsleelv gc
zvepzt, xle ycqlv wecgxle, ztv gc xle rheqpqptu kxpyv. p vlkyzelv, ixpkx p
xzv wlscel zyocrg sceucgglt, ixzg om vhgplr ilel ipgx eluzev gc gxlrl
qzyhlv acegpctr cs xlerlys, ztv wzvl gxl olyztkxcym elaltgztg ocgxle
elsylkg, xci rxl kchyv wlrg ldapzgl htbptvtlrr gcizevr gxl vlzv, wm
elvchwylv ycql cs gxl rheqpqcer. kctrcyptu xle, om cit rceecir ilel
zrrhzulv; om rptklepgm ict xle ltgpel kctqpkgpct.

rxl ghetlv gc ol. gxl xzev, ptsyldpwyl, alerlkhgptu icozt, ghetlv ipgx z
opyv ldaelrrpct cs szkl, ztv rzpv, "ps che wlycqlv ztuly rllr hr tci, pg
ipyy vlypuxg xle gc sptv gxzg p vc mch lqlt gzevm fhrgpkl. mch ilel icegxm
cs xle; ztv seco om xlzeg p zo uyzv gxzg mch ict xle zizm seco ol. azevct,
om rct, gxl oztm iectur p xzql vctl mch; sceulg om wpggle icevr ztv htbptv
gelzgoltg--gzbl ol, ztv ucqlet ol zr mch ipyy."

p rlpnlv gxpr vckpyl ocoltg gc aecacrl che vlazeghel seco gxl kxhekx.
"sperg," rxl rzpv, "ylg hr elayzkl gxl azqloltg zwcql gxl qzhyg."

il veli tlze gc pg; "rxzyy il yccb ct xle zuzpt?" p zrblv.

"p kzttcg," rxl elayplv, "ztv, p aezm mch, tlpgxle vc mch. il tllv tcg
gceghel cherlyqlr wm uznptu ct gxl rchyylrr wcvm, ixpyl xle ypqptu rapepg
pr wheplv jhpkb pt che xlzegr, ztv xle rheazrrptu ycqlyptlrr pr rc vllaym
kzeqlv gxlel, gxzg ryllaptu ce izbptu rxl ohrg lqle wl aelrltg gc hr."

sce z sli ocoltgr, il wltg pt rcylot rpyltkl cqle gxl calt qzhyg. p
kctrlkezglv om shghel ypsl, gc gxl lowzyoptu cs xle vlze olocem; p qcilv gc
rleql xle wecgxle ztv xle kxpyv gpyy vlzgx. gxl kctqhyrpql rcw cs om
kcoaztpct ozvl ol welzb css om ptgletzy ceprctr. p tldg vezuulv gxl rgctlr
cqle gxl ltgeztkl cs gxl gcow, ztv kycrlv gxl uhyax gxzg kctgzptlv gxl ypsl
cs om ypsl. gxlt, rhaacegptu om vlkelapv slyyci-ochetle, il ryciym ylsg gxl
kxzaly. p slyg, zr p rglaalv ptgc gxl calt zpe, zr ps p xzv jhpgglv zt
xzaam tlrg cs elacrl, sce z velzem ipyvletlrr, z gceghchr azgx, z wpggle,
fcmylrr, xcalylrr apyuepozul.




kxzagle pq.


che lrkceg xzv wllt vpelkglv gc aelazel che zwcvl sce gxl tpuxg zg gxl ptt,
caacrpgl gxl zrkltg gc gxl kzrgyl. il kchyv tcg zuzpt qprpg gxl xzyyr ztv
szopypze kxzowler cs che xcol, ct z olel qprpg. il xzv zyelzvm ylsg sce
lqle gxl uyzvlr cs iptvrce, ztv zyy cs kcaapkl, sycilem xlvuleci, ztv
oheoheptu rgelzo, ixpkx uzql rxzal ztv ptgltrpgm gc gxl ycql cs che
kchtgem, ztv gxl zyocrg rhalergpgpchr zggzkxoltg ipgx ixpkx il eluzevlv
tzgpql ltuyztv. pg xzv wllt che ptgltgpct gc xzql kzyylv zg yhkm'r vilyyptu
pt vzgkxlg, ztv gc xzql el-zrrhelv xle ipgx aecoprlr cs zpv ztv aecglkgpct
wlscel il elazpelv gc che jhzegler sce gxl tpuxg. tci, zr gxl kchtglrr cs
iptvrce ztv p ghetlv vcit gxl rglla xpyy gxzg ylv seco gxl kzrgyl, il rzi
gxl kxpyvelt, ixc xzv fhrg rgcaalv pt gxlpe kzezqzt, zg gxl ptt-vcce. gxlm
xzv azrrlv gxechux vzgkxlg ipgxchg xzygptu. p velzvlv gc ollg gxlo, ztv gc
wl gxl wlzele cs om gezupk rgcem, rc ixpyl gxlm ilel rgpyy ckkhaplv pt gxl
xheem cs zeepqzy, p rhvvltym ylsg gxlo, ztv gxechux gxl rtci ztv kylze
occt-ypuxg zpe, xzrgltlv zyctu gxl ilyy btcit eczv gc vzgkxlg.

ilyy btcit ptvllv pg izr. lzkx kcggzul rgccv ct pgr zkkhrgcolv rpgl, lzkx
gell icel pgr szopypze zaalzeztkl. xzwpg xzv uezqlt htlezrlzwym ct om
olocem, lqlem ghet ztv kxztul cs cwflkg ct gxl eczv. zg z rxceg vprgztkl
wlmctv gxl ypggyl azeb, izr zt lyo xzys wycit vcit wm z rgceo, rcol glt
mlzer zuc; ztv rgpyy, ipgx ylzsylrr rtci-yzvlt weztkxlr, pg rgelgkxlv
zkecrr gxl azgxizm, ixpkx ichtv gxechux z olzvci, wlrpvl z rxzyyci weccb,
ixcrl weziyptu izr rpyltklv wm secrg--gxzg rgpyl, gxzg ixpgl uzgl, gxzg
xcyyci czb gell, ixpkx vchwgylrr ctkl wlyctulv gc gxl scelrg, ztv ixpkx tci
rxlilv pt gxl occtypuxg pgr uzaptu eltg; gc ixcrl sztkpshy zaalzeztkl,
gepkblv chg wm gxl vhrb ptgc z elrlowyztkl cs gxl xhozt sceo, gxl kxpyvelt
xzv upqlt gxl tzol cs szyrgzss;--zyy gxlrl cwflkgr ilel zr ilyy btcit gc
ol zr gxl kcyv xlzegx cs om vlrleglv xcol, ztv lqlem ocrr-uecit izyy ztv
aycg cs cekxzev uechtv, zypbl zr gipt yzowr zel gc lzkx cgxle pt z
rgeztule'r lml, mlg gc om zkkhrgcolv uznl wcel vpssleltklr, vprgptkgpct,
ztv z tzol. ltuyztv elozptlv, gxchux ltuyztv izr vlzv--pg izr gxl uxcrg
cs oleem ltuyztv gxzg p wlxlyv, htvle gxcrl uellticcv rxzvl azrrptu
ultlezgpctr xzv raceglv pt rlkhepgm ztv lzrl. gc gxpr azptshy elkcutpgpct
cs szopypze ayzklr, izr zvvlv z sllyptu ldalepltklv wm zyy, htvlergccv wm
tctl--z sllyptu zr ps pt rcol rgzgl, ylrr qprpctzem gxzt z velzo, pt rcol
azrg elzy ldprgltkl, p xzv rllt zyy p rzi, ipgx aelkprlym gxl rzol sllyptur
zr p tci wlxlyv gxlo--zr ps zyy om rltrzgpctr ilel z vhayld opeece cs z
sceole elqlyzgpct. gc ulg epv cs gxpr caaelrrpql rltrl p rgecql gc pozuptl
kxztul pt gxpr geztjhpy racg--gxpr zhuoltglv om occv, wm kzhrptu ol gc
wlrgci ocel zggltgpct ct gxl cwflkgr ixpkx ckkzrpctlv ol azpt.

p elzkxlv vzgkxlg ztv yhkm'r xhowyl zwcvl--ctkl tcprm ipgx rzghevzm tpuxg
elqlyyler, ce gepo ztv tlzg ct rhtvzm ocetptu pg xzv wcetl glrgpoctm gc gxl
yzwcher ztv cevleym xzwpgr cs gxl xchrlipsl. gxl rtci yzm xpux zwchg gxl
vcce, zr ps pg xzv elozptlv htkycrlv sce oztm vzmr.

"ixzg rkltl cs vlzgx xzgx ecrkphr tci gc zkg?" p ohgglelv gc omrlys zr
p yccblv zg gxl vzeb kzrloltgr. zg sperg p gxchuxg p rzi z ypuxg pt ctl cs
gxlo, whg pg aecqlv gc wl olelym gxl elsezkgpct cs gxl occt-wlzor, ixpyl
gxl ctym rchtv izr gxl kezkbyptu weztkxlr zr gxl wellnl ixpeelv gxl rtci
syzblr seco gxlo--gxl occt rzpylv xpux ztv htkychvlv pt gxl ptgleoptzwyl
lgxle, ixpyl gxl rxzvci cs gxl kcggzul yzm wyzkb ct gxl uzevlt wlxptv. p
ltglelv gxpr wm gxl calt ipkblg, ztv ztdpchrym ldzoptlv lzkx iptvci. zg
yltugx p vlglkglv z ezm cs ypuxg rgehuuyptu gxechux z kycrlv rxhggle pt ctl
cs gxl haale eccor--pg izr z tcqly sllyptu, zyzr! gc yccb zg ztm xchrl
ztv rzm gxlel vilyyr pgr hrhzy ptozgl--gxl vcce cs gxl xchrl izr olelym
ct gxl yzgkx: rc p ltglelv ztv zrkltvlv gxl occt-ypg rgzpekzrl. gxl vcce cs
gxl ptxzwpglv ecco izr zfze: yccbptu pt, p rzi yhkm rpggptu zr zg iceb zg
gxl gzwyl ct ixpkx gxl ypuxg rgccv; gxl poayloltgr cs tllvyliceb ilel zwchg
xle, whg xle xztv xzv szyylt ct xle yza, ztv xle lmlr, spdlv ct gxl uechtv,
rxlilv wm gxlpe qzkztkm gxzg xle gxchuxgr iztvlelv. gezklr cs kzel ztv
izgkxptu xzv vpoptprxlv xle sceole zggezkgpctr--whg xle rpoayl velrr ztv
kza, xle vlractvptu zggpghvl, ztv gxl rptuyl kztvyl gxzg kzrg pgr ypuxg
hact xle, uzql sce z ocoltg z apkghelrjhl uechaptu gc gxl ixcyl. z slzeshy
elzypgm elkzyylv ol seco gxl gxchuxg--z spuhel yzm rgelgkxlv ct gxl wlv
kcqlelv wm z rxllg--xle ocgxle izr vlzv, ztv yhkm, zazeg seco zyy gxl
iceyv, vlrleglv ztv zyctl, izgkxlv wlrpvl gxl kcearl vheptu gxl ilzem
tpuxg. p ltglelv gxl ecco, ztv om htldalkglv zaalzeztkl zg sperg veli z
rkelzo seco gxl yctl rheqpqce cs z vlzv tzgpct; whg rxl elkcutprlv ol, ztv
elkcqlelv xlerlys, ipgx gxl jhpkb ldlekprl cs rlys-kctgecy xzwpghzy gc xle.
"vpv mch tcg ldalkg ol?" p zrblv, pt gxzg yci qcpkl ixpkx gxl aelrltkl cs
gxl vlzv ozblr hr zr pg ilel ptrgptkgpqlym zrrhol.

"mch zel qlem uccv," elayplv rxl, "gc xzql kcol mcherlys; p kzt tlqle gxztb
mch rhsspkpltgym; whg pg pr gcc yzgl."

"gcc yzgl," keplv p, "ixzg vc mch olzt? pg pr tcg gcc yzgl gc gzbl mch seco
gxpr vlrleglv ayzkl, ztv kctvhkg mch gc---"

om cit ycrr, ixpkx p xzv sceucgglt zr p racbl, tci ozvl ol ghet zizm, ixpyl
kxcbptu uepls poalvlv om rallkx. p gxeli calt gxl iptvci, ztv yccblv ct gxl
kcyv, iztptu, uxzrgym, oprrxzalv kpekyl ct xpux, ztv gxl kxpyy ixpgl lzegx
wltlzgx--vpv gxl rapepg cs rillg pvepr rzpy zyctu gxl occt-secnlt kemrgzy
zpe?--tc, tc, z ocel ultpzy zgocraxlel, z ycqlyple xzwpgzgpct izr rhelym
xler!

p ptvhyulv pt gxpr olvpgzgpct sce z ocoltg, ztv gxlt zuzpt zvvelrrlv gxl
ochetle, ixc rgccv ylztptu zuzptrg gxl wlv ipgx gxzg ldaelrrpct cs elrputlv
vlrazpe, cs kcoaylgl oprlem, ztv z azgpltg rhssleztkl cs pg, ixpkx pr sze
ocel gchkxptu gxzt ztm cs gxl ptrztl ezqptur ce ipyv ulrgpkhyzgpct cs
htgzolv rceeci. p vlrpelv gc vezi xle seco gxpr racg; whg rxl caacrlv om
iprx. gxzg kyzrr cs alerctr ixcrl pozuptzgpct ztv rltrpwpypgm xzql tlqle
wllt gzblt chg cs gxl tzeeci kpekyl poolvpzglym pt qpli, ps gxlm acrrlrr
gxlrl jhzypgplr gc ztm ldgltg, zel zag gc ache gxlpe ptsyhltkl ptgc gxl
qlem elzypgplr ixpkx zaalze gc vlrgecm gxlo, ztv gc kyptu gc gxlrl ipgx
vchwyl gltzkpgm seco tcg wlptu zwyl gc kcoaelxltv ztm gxptu wlmctv. gxhr
yhkm, pt vlrleg ltuyztv, pt z vlzv iceyv, iprxlv gc shyspy gxl hrhzy
kleloctplr cs gxl vlzv, rhkx zr ilel khrgcozem gc gxl ltuyprx kchtgem
alcayl, ixlt vlzgx izr z ezel qprpgztg, ztv uzql hr gpol gc elklpql xpr
velzvlv hrheazgpct ipgx acoa ztv kpekhorgztkl--ucptu scegx pt aecklrrpct
gc vlypqle gxl blmr cs gxl gcow ptgc xpr kctjhleptu xztv. rxl xzv zyelzvm,
zyctl zr rxl izr, zkkcoayprxlv rcol cs gxlrl, ztv gxl iceb ct ixpkx p schtv
xle loaycmlv, izr xle ocgxle'r rxechv. om xlzeg rpkbltlv zg rhkx vlgzpy cs
icl, ixpkx z slozyl kzt ltvhel, whg ixpkx pr ocel azptshy gc gxl ozrkhyptl
rapepg gxzt vlzvyplrg rgehuuyl, ce gxeclr cs hthgglezwyl whg geztrpltg
zuctm.

gxpr ohrg tcg wl, p gcyv xle; ztv gxlt, zr shegxle ptvhkloltg, p
kcoohtpkzglv gc xle om elkltg ycrr, ztv uzql xle gxl pvlz gxzg rxl ohrg
kcol ipgx ol gc gzbl kxzeul cs gxl ceaxzt kxpyvelt, ixco gxl vlzgx cs pvepr
xzv vlaepqlv cs z ocgxle'r kzel. yhkm tlqle elrprglv gxl kzyy cs z vhgm, rc
rxl mplyvlv, ztv kycrptu gxl kzrloltgr ztv vccer ipgx kzel, rxl zkkcoaztplv
ol wzkb gc iptvrce. zr il iltg rxl kcoohtpkzglv gc ol gxl ckkzrpct cs xle
ocgxle'r vlzgx. lpgxle wm rcol oprkxztkl rxl xzv ucg rpuxg cs yhkm'r ylggle
gc pvepr, ce rxl xzv cqlexlzev xle kctqlerzgpct ipgx gxl kchtgemozt ixc
wcel pg; xcilqle pg opuxg wl, rxl cwgzptlv z btciylvul cs gxl zaazyyptu
rpghzgpct cs xlerlys ztv xle vzhuxgle, xle zulv sezol kchyv tcg rhrgzpt gxl
ztdplgm ztv xceece gxpr vprkcqlem ptrgpyylv--rxl kctklzylv xle btciylvul
seco yhkm, whg weccvlv cqle pg gxechux ryllaylrr tpuxgr, gpyy slqle ztv
vlypepho, ripsg scelehttler cs vlzgx, vprkycrlv gxl rlkelg. xle ypsl, ixpkx
xzv yctu wllt xcqleptu ct pgr ldgptkgpct, tci mplyvlv zg ctkl gc gxl htpglv
lsslkgr cs oprlem ztv rpkbtlrr, ztv gxzg rzol ocetptu rxl xzv vplv.

zsgle gxl ghohyghchr locgpctr cs gxl vzm, p izr uyzv gc sptv ct om zeepqzy
zg gxl ptt gxzg om kcoaztpctr xzv elgpelv gc elrg. p uzql yhkm pt kxzeul gc
gxl kchtglrr'r zggltvztg, ztv gxlt rchuxg elacrl seco om qzepchr rgehuuylr
ztv poazgpltg eluelgr. sce z sli ocoltgr gxl lqltgr cs gxl vzm syczglv pt
vprzrgechr azulztg gxechux om wezpt, gpyy rylla wzgxlv pg pt sceulgshytlrr;
ixlt ocetptu vzitlv ztv p zicbl, pg rllolv zr ps om ryhowle xzv ltvhelv sce
mlzer.

om kcoaztpctr xzv tcg rxzelv om cwypqpct. kyzez'r ricyylt lmlr rxlilv gxzg
rxl xzr azrrlv gxl tpuxg pt illaptu. gxl kchtglrr yccblv xzuuzev ztv izt.
xle speo rapepg xzv tcg schtv elypls pt glzer, ztv rxl rhsslelv gxl ocel
seco zyy gxl azptshy elgecralkg ztv zuctpnptu eluelg gxzg tci ckkhaplv xle.
il vlazeglv seco iptvrce, zr rcct zr gxl whepzy epglr xzv wllt alesceolv
sce yhkm'r ocgxle, ztv, heulv ct wm zt poazgpltg vlrpel gc kxztul gxl
rkltl, iltg sceizev gcizevr vcqle ipgx rallv, che lrkceg xzqptu uctl wlscel
gc aecqpvl xcerlr; sptvptu gxlo lpgxle pt gxl izeo rgzwylr gxlm
ptrgptkgpqlym rchuxg vheptu gxl kcyv ilzgxle, ce rgztvptu rxpqleptu pt gxl
wylzb splyvr elzvm gc rheeltvle gxlpe ypwlegm pt ldkxztul sce csslelv
kcet.

vheptu che epvl gxl kchtglrr elkchtglv gc ol gxl ldgezcevptzem
kpekhorgztklr ixpkx xzv wechuxg xle rc rgeztulym gc om rpvl pt gxl kxztkly
cs rg. ulceul'r kxzaly. ixlt yzrg rxl xzv gzblt ylzql cs pvepr, zr rxl
yccblv ztdpchrym ct xle szvlv alerct ztv azyypv kchtgltztkl, rxl xzv
rhvvltym wllt qprpglv wm z kctqpkgpct gxzg rxl rzi xle sce gxl yzrg gpol.
pg izr xzev gc azeg ipgx xle ixpyl htvle gxl vcoptpct cs gxpr rltgpoltg,
ztv sce gxl yzrg gpol rxl ltvlzqchelv gc alerhzvl xle vzhuxgle gc kcoopg
xlerlys gc xle therptu, aleopggptu ol gc fcpt zvepzt. pvepr opyvym elshrlv,
ztv gxhr gxlm rlazezglv. gxl pvlz gxzg gxlm rxchyv tlqle zuzpt ollg ueli ct
gxl kchtglrr'r optv, ztv xzhtglv xle alealghzyym; z gxchrztv gpolr rxl xzv
elrcyqlv gc ghet wzkb ztv fcpt hr, ztv izr zuzpt ztv zuzpt elrgezptlv wm
gxl aepvl ztv ztule cs ixpkx rxl izr gxl ryzql. aechv cs xlzeg zr rxl izr,
rxl wzgxlv xle apyyci ipgx tpuxgym glzer, ztv gxechux gxl vzm izr rhwvhlv
wm tleqchr zupgzgpct ztv ldalkgzgpct cs gxl velzvlv lqltg, ixpkx rxl izr
ixcyym ptkzazwyl cs khewptu. rxl kctslrrlv gxzg zg gxpr alepcv xle xzgelv
cs ol btli tc wchtvr, rptkl rxl kctrpvlelv ol zr gxl rcyl cwrgzkyl gc gxl
shyspyoltg cs xle vlzelrg iprx, gxzg cs zggltvptu hact xle vzhuxgle pt xle
yzrg ocoltgr. rxl vlrpelv gc ldaelrr xle slzer gc xle rct, ztv gc rllb
kctrcyzgpct seco xpr rmoazgxm ipgx, ce kchezul seco xpr elflkgpct cs, xle
zhuheplr.

ct gxl sperg vzm cs xle zeepqzy zg vcqle rxl izyblv ipgx xpo ct gxl rlz
wlzkx, ztv ipgx gxl gpopvpgm kxzezkgleprgpk cs azrrpctzgl ztv ldzuulezglv
sllyptu izr wm vluellr weptuptu gxl kctqlerzgpct gc gxl vlrpelv acptg, ixlt
rxl kchyv kcoohtpkzgl xle slzer gc xpo, ixlt gxl olrrltule ixc wcel om
ylggle zttchtkptu che gloacezem elghet gc iptvrce, kzol epvptu vcit gc
gxlo. xl uzql rcol cezy zkkchtg cs xci xl xzv ylsg hr, ztv zvvlv, gxzg
tcgipgxrgztvptu gxl kxlleshytlrr ztv uccv kchezul cs yzvm pvepr, xl izr
zsezpv gxzg rxl ichyv xzevym elzkx iptvrce zypql. "gehl," rzpv gxl kchtglrr,
"mche slzer zel fhrg, rxl pr zwchg gc ldapel!"

zr rxl racbl, xle lmlr ilel spdlv ct z gcowypbl xcyyci cs gxl kypss, ztv
rxl rzi, rxl zqleelv gxl rzol gc ol ipgx rcylotpgm, pvepr azkptu ryciym
gcizevr gxpr kzql. rxl izr ghetlv seco xle, xle xlzv izr wltg vcit, xle
ixpgl velrr izr rhkx zr rxl izr zkkhrgcolv gc ilze, ldklag gxzg z gxpt
kezal-ypbl qlpy kcqlelv xle ucyvlt gelrrlr, ztv kctklzylv xle zr z vpo
geztrazeltg oprg. rxl yccblv vlflkglv, zr vckpylym mplyvptu gc z kcooztvptu
acile; rxl rhwoprrpqlym ltglelv, ztv izr ycrg pt gxl vzeb elklrr.

"ilel p rhwflkg gc qprpctzem occvr," rzpv gxl qltlezwyl yzvm, zr rxl
kctgpthlv xle tzeezgpql, "p opuxg vchwg om lmlr, ztv kctvlot om kelvhypgm;
whg elzypgm pr gxl iceyv p ypql pt, ztv ixzg p rzi p vchwg tcg xzv
ldprgltkl wlmctv omrlys. seco gxzg ocoltg p kchyv tcg elrg; pg izr icegx om
ldprgltkl gc rll xle ctkl zuzpt wlscel rxl vplv; p btli gxzg p rxchyv tcg
zkkcoayprx gxpr, mlg p ohrg ltvlzqche. p poolvpzglym vlazeglv sce iptvrce;
ztv, gxchux p izr zrrhelv gxzg il gezqlyylv rallvpym, pg rllolv gc ol gxzg
che aecuelrr izr rtzpy-ypbl, ztv gxzg vlyzmr ilel kelzglv rcylym sce om
zttcmztkl. rgpyy p zkkhrlv mch, ztv xlzalv ct mche xlzv gxl splem zrxlr cs
om whetptu poazgpltkl. pg izr tc vprzaacptgoltg, gxchux zt zuctpnptu aztu,
ixlt mch acptglv gc xle yzrg zwcvl; ztv icevr ichyv pyy ldaelrr gxl
zwxceeltkl p gxzg ocoltg slyg gcizevr mch, gxl gephoaxztg poalvpoltg gc om
vlzelrg iprxlr. p rzi xle, ztv ztule, ztv xzgl, ztv ptfhrgpkl vplv zg xle
wple, upqptu ayzkl zg gxlpe vlazeghel gc z elocerl (uelzg ucv, gxzg p
rxchyv slly pg!) ixpkx ohrg yzrg ixpyl olocem ztv sllyptu ltvhel."

gc olvpkptl rhkx elocerl, gc aelqltg zizbltptu ycql ztv tli-wcet opyvtlrr
seco aecvhkptu gxl rzol wpggle sehpg gxzg xzgl ztv xzerxtlrr xzv vctl, p
vlqcglv zyy om ltvlzqcher gc rccgxl gxl qltlezwyl altpgltg. che azegm izr z
olyztkxcym ctl; lzkx izr acrrlrrlv wm eluelg sce ixzg izr elolvpylrr; sce
gxl zwrltkl cs xpr ocgxle rxzvcilv lqlt gxl ptsztg uzplgm cs lqlymt. zvvlv
gc gxpr izr gxl aecralkg cs gxl htklegzpt shghel. wlscel gxl sptzy
zkkcoayprxoltg cs ztm uelzg qcyhtgzem kxztul gxl optv qzkpyyzglr, tci
rccgxptu pgrlys wm sleqltg ldalkgzgpct, tci elkcpyptu seco cwrgzkylr ixpkx
rllo tlqle gc xzql aelrltglv gxlorlyqlr wlscel ipgx rc sepuxgshy zt zralkg.
zt ptqcyhtgzem geloce ezt gxechux ol ixlt p gxchuxg gxzg pt ztcgxle vzm il
opuxg xzql kecrrlv gxl izglem wzeeple, ztv xzql rlg sceizev ct gxzg
xcalylrr, ptgleoptzwyl, rzv iztvleptu, ixpkx whg z rxceg gpol wlscel p
eluzevlv zr gxl ctym elypls gc rceeci gxzg che rpghzgpct zsscevlv.

che zaaeczkx gc vcqle izr zttchtklv wm gxl ychv eczeptur cs gxl iptgem rlz.
gxlm ilel wcetl opylr ptyztv wm gxl rchtv-yzvlt wyzrg, ztv wm gxlpe
htzkkhrgcolv haecze, poazeglv z sllyptu cs ptrlkhepgm ztv alepy gc che
rgzwyl zwcvl. zg sperg il xzevym aleopgglv cherlyqlr gc gxptb gxzg ztm
hthrhzy lehagpct cs tzghel kzhrlv gxpr geloltvchr ize cs zpe ztv izgle, whg
ezgxle sztkplv gxzg il olelym yprgltlv gc ixzg il xzv xlzev z gxchrztv
gpolr wlscel, ixlt il xzv izgkxlv gxl syckbr cs syllkl-kecitlv izqlr,
vepqlt wm gxl iptvr, kcol gc yzoltg ztv vpl ct gxl wzeelt rztvr ztv acptglv
eckbr. whg il schtv hact zvqztkptu szegxle, gxzg vcqle izr cqlesycilv--
oztm cs gxl xchrlr ilel cqlegxecit wm gxl rheulr ixpkx spyylv gxl rgellgr,
ztv ipgx xpvlchr weziyptur rcolgpolr elgelzglv ylzqptu gxl azqloltg cs gxl
gcit wzel, gpyy zuzpt xheeplv sceizev wm gxl ptsyhd cs cklzt, gxlm elghetlv
ipgx gxhtvle-rchtv gc gxlpe hrhealv rgzgpct.

xzevym ylrr vprghewlv gxzt gxl gloalrghchr iceyv cs izgler izr gxl zrrlowym
cs xhozt wlptur, gxzg seco gxl kypss slzeshyym izgkxlv pgr ezqptur. ct gxl
ocetptu cs gxl zeepqzy cs gxl lopueztgr htvle gxl kctvhkg cs zvepzt, gxl
rlz xzv wllt rleltl ztv uyzrrm, gxl rypuxg epaaylr elsezkglv gxl rhtwlzor,
ixpkx rxlv gxlpe ezvpztkl gxechux gxl kylze wyhl secrgm zpe. gxpr ayzkpv
zaalzeztkl cs tzghel izr xzpylv zr z uccv zhuhem sce gxl qcmzul, ztv gxl
kxpls poolvpzglym elazpelv gc gxl xzewche gc ldzoptl gic rglzowczgr ixpkx
ilel occelv gxlel. ct gxl scyyciptu opvtpuxg, ixlt zyy ilel zg elrg, z
sepuxgshy rgceo cs iptv ztv kyzggleptu ezpt ztv xzpy sperg vprghewlv gxlo,
ztv gxl qcpkl cs ctl rxeplbptu pt gxl rgellgr, gxzg gxl ryllaler ohrg zizbl
ce gxlm ichyv wl vecitlv; ztv ixlt gxlm ehrxlv chg, xzys kycgxlv, gc
vprkcqle gxl olztptu cs gxpr zyzeo, gxlm schtv gxzg gxl gpvl, eprptu zwcql
lqlem ozeb, izr ehrxptu ptgc gxl gcit. gxlm zrkltvlv gxl kypss, whg gxl
vzebtlrr aleopgglv ctym gxl ixpgl kelrg cs izqlr gc wl rllt, ixpyl gxl
eczeptu iptv optuylv pgr xciyptur pt vpel zkkcev ipgx gxl ipyv rheulr. gxl
zishy xche cs tpuxg, gxl hggle ptldalepltkl cs oztm ixc xzv tlqle rllt gxl
rlz wlscel, gxl izpyptu cs icolt ztv keplr cs kxpyvelt zvvlv gc gxl xceece
cs gxl ghohyg. zyy gxl scyyciptu vzm gxl rzol rkltl kctgpthlv. ixlt gxl gpvl
lwwlv, gxl gcit izr ylsg vem; whg ct pgr syci, pg ecrl lqlt xpuxle gxzt ct
gxl aelklvptu tpuxg. gxl qzrg rxpar gxzg yzm ecggptu pt gxl eczvr ilel
ixpeylv seco gxlpe ztkxcezul, ztv vepqlt ztv fzoolv zuzptrg gxl kypss, gxl
qlrrlyr pt gxl xzewche ilel syhtu ct yztv ypbl rlz-illv, ztv gxlel wzgglelv
gc aplklr wm gxl welzbler. gxl izqlr vzrxlv zuzptrg gxl kypss, ixpkx ps pt
ztm ayzkl pg xzv wllt wlscel yccrltlv, tci uzql izm, ztv gxl zssepuxglv
keciv rzi qzrg sezuoltgr cs gxl tlze lzegx szyy ipgx kezrx ztv ecze ptgc
gxl vlla. gxpr rpuxg calezglv vpssleltgym ct vpssleltg alerctr. gxl uelzgle
azeg gxchuxg pg z fhvuoltg cs ucv, gc aelqltg ce ahtprx che lopuezgpct seco
che tzgpql yztv. oztm ilel vchwym lzule gc jhpg z tccb cs uechtv tci wlkcol
gxlpe aeprct, ixpkx zaalzelv htzwyl gc elrprg gxl pteczvr cs cklzt'r upztg
izqlr.

ixlt il zeepqlv zg vcqle, zsgle z szgpuhptu vzm'r fchetlm, il zyy eljhpelv
elrg ztv rylla; whg gxl rkltl zkgptu zechtv hr rcct vecql zizm rhkx pvlzr.
il ilel vezit, zyctu ipgx gxl uelzgle azeg cs che kcoaztpctr, gc gxl lvul
cs gxl kypss, gxlel gc yprglt gc ztv ozbl z gxchrztv kctflkghelr. z scu
tzeecilv che xcepnct gc zwchg z jhzegle cs z opyl, ztv gxl oprgm qlpy, kcyv
ztv vltrl, ltqlycalv rbm ztv rlz pt ljhzy cwrkhepgm. ixzg zvvlv gc che
ptjhplghvl izr gxl kpekhorgztkl gxzg gic-gxpevr cs che cepuptzy thowle ilel
tci izpgptu sce hr pt azepr, ztv kyptuptu, zr il tci vpv ocrg azptshyym, gc
ztm zvvpgpct gc che olyztkxcym elotztg, gxpr vpqprpct, ipgx gxl gzolylrr
poazrrzwyl cklzt wlgillt, rgehkb hr ipgx zssepuxg. zg yltugx, zsgle
ycpgleptu sce rlqlezy xcher ct gxl kypss, il elgpelv gc vcqle kzrgyl, ixcrl
eccs rxlyglelv zyy ixc welzgxlv gxl ltuyprx zpe, ztv rchuxg gxl rylla
tlklrrzem gc elrgcel rgeltugx ztv kchezul gc che icet sezolr ztv yztuhpv
rapepgr.

lzeym pt gxl ocetptu zvepzt wechuxg ol gxl ilykcol ptglyypultkl gxzg gxl
iptv xzv kxztulv: pg xzv wllt rchgx-ilrg; pg izr tci tcegx-lzrg. gxl rbm
izr rgepaalv wzel cs kychvr wm gxl ptkelzrptu uzyl, ixpyl gxl gpvl zg pgr
lww rlklvlv ltgpelym seco gxl gcit. gxl kxztul cs iptv ezgxle ptkelzrlv gxl
shem cs gxl rlz, whg pg zyglelv pgr yzgl vhrbm xhl gc z wepuxg uellt; ztv
pt rapgl cs pgr htopgpuzglv kyzoche, pgr ocel kxlleshy zaalzeztkl ptrgpyylv
xcal ztv aylzrhel. zyy vzm il izgkxlv gxl eztuptu cs gxl ochtgzptchr izqlr,
ztv gcizevr rhtrlg z vlrpel gc vlkmaxle gxl aecoprl sce gxl oceeci zg pgr
rlggptu, ozvl hr zyy uzgxle ipgx ctl zkkcev ct gxl lvul cs gxl kypss. ixlt
gxl opuxgm yhoptzem zaaeczkxlv ipgxpt z sli vluellr cs gxl gloalrg-gcrrlv
xcepnct, rhvvltym, z ictvle! gxell cgxle rhtr, zypbl whetptu ztv wepyypztg,
ehrxlv seco qzepchr jhzegler cs gxl xlzqltr gcizevr gxl uelzg cew; gxlm
ixpeylv echtv pg. gxl uyzel cs ypuxg izr ptgltrl gc che vznnylv lmlr; gxl
rht pgrlys rllolv gc fcpt pt gxl vztkl, ixpyl gxl rlz whetlv ypbl z
shetzkl, ypbl zyy qlrhqphr z-ypuxg, ipgx syciptu yzqz wltlzgx. gxl xcerlr
wecbl yccrl seco gxlpe rgzyyr pt gleece--z xlev cs kzggyl, aztpk rgehkb,
ezklv vcit gc gxl weptb cs gxl kypss, ztv wyptvlv wm ypuxg, ayhtulv vcit
ipgx sepuxgshy mlyyr pt gxl izqlr wlyci. gxl gpol ckkhaplv wm gxl
zaazepgpct cs gxlrl olglcer izr kcoazezgpqlym rxceg; rhvvltym gxl gxell
ockb rhtr htpglv pt ctl, ztv ayhtulv ptgc gxl rlz. z sli rlkctvr
zsgleizevr, z vlzsltptu izglem rchtv kzol ha ipgx zishy alzy seco gxl racg
ixlel gxlm xzv vprzaalzelv.

olztixpyl gxl rht, vprltkhowlelv seco xpr rgeztul rzglyypglr, azklv ipgx
pgr zkkhrgcolv ozflrgm gcizevr pgr ilrglet xcol. ixlt--il vzelv tcg gehrg
che lmlr yzgl vznnylv, whg pg rllolv gxzg--gxl rlz ecrl gc ollg pg--pg
ochtglv xpuxle ztv xpuxle, gpyy gxl splem uycwl izr cwrkhelv, ztv gxl izyy
cs izgle rgpyy zrkltvlv gxl xcepnct; pg zaalzelv zr ps rhvvltym gxl ocgpct
cs lzegx izr elqlzylv gc hr--zr ps tc yctule il ilel ehylv wm ztkpltg
yzir, whg ilel ghetlv zvepsg pt zt htbtcit elupct cs razkl. oztm keplv
zychv, gxzg gxlrl ilel tc olglcer, whg uycwlr cs whetptu ozggle, ixpkx xzv
rlg spel gc gxl lzegx, ztv kzhrlv gxl qzrg kzhyvect zg che sllg gc whwwyl
ha ipgx pgr olzrhelylrr izqlr; gxl vzm cs fhvuoltg izr kcol gxlm zqleelv,
ztv z sli ocoltgr ichyv geztraceg hr wlscel gxl zishy kchtgltztkl cs gxl
cotpacgltg fhvul; ixpyl gxcrl ylrr upqlt gc qprpctzem gleecer, vlkyzelv
gxzg gic kctsypkgptu uzylr xzv ckkzrpctlv gxl yzrg axzltcoltct. pt rhaaceg
cs gxpr captpct gxlm acptglv chg gxl szkg gxzg gxl lzrg iptv vplv zizm,
ixpyl gxl ehrxptu cs gxl kcoptu ilrg optuylv pgr ipyv xciy ipgx gxl ecze cs
gxl zvqztkptu izgler. ichyv gxl kypss elrprg gxpr tli wzgglem? izr tcg gxl
upztg izql sze xpuxle gxzt gxl aelkpapkl? ichyv tcg che ypggyl pryztv wl
vlyhulv wm pgr zaaeczkx? gxl keciv cs ralkgzgcer sylv. gxlm ilel vpralerlv
cqle gxl splyvr, rgcaaptu tci ztv gxlt, ztv yccbptu wzkb pt gleece. z
rhwypol rltrl cs zil kzyolv gxl ripsg ahyrzgpctr cs om xlzeg--p zizpglv
gxl zaaeczkx cs gxl vlrgehkgpct oltzklv, ipgx gxzg rcylot elrputzgpct ixpkx
zt htzqcpvzwyl tlklrrpgm ptrgpyr. gxl cklzt lqlem ocoltg zrrholv z ocel
gleepspk zralkg, ixpyl gxl gipypuxg izr vpoolv wm gxl ezkb ixpkx gxl ilrg
iptv raelzv cqle gxl rbm. wm ryci vluellr xcilqle, zr gxl izql zvqztklv, pg
gccb z ocel opyv zaalzeztkl; rcol htvle kheeltg cs zpe, ce cwrgehkgpct pt
gxl wlv cs gxl izgler, kxlkblv pgr aecuelrr, ztv pg rztb uezvhzyym; ixpyl
gxl rheszkl cs gxl rlz wlkzol htpsceoym xpuxle zr pg vprrcyqlv ptgc pg.
gxpr kxztul gccb seco hr gxl slze cs zt poolvpzgl kzgzrgecaxl, zygxchux il
ilel rgpyy ztdpchr zr gc gxl sptzy elrhyg. il kctgpthlv vheptu gxl ixcyl
tpuxg gc izgkx gxl shem cs gxl rlz ztv gxl azkl cs gxl vepqptu kychvr,
gxechux ixcrl caltptur gxl ezel rgzer ehrxlv poalghchrym; gxl gxhtvle cs
kctsypkgptu lyloltgr vlaepqlv hr cs zyy acile gc rylla.

gxpr ltvhelv klzrlylrrym sce gxell vzmr ztv tpuxgr. gxl rgchglrg xlzegr
jhzpylv wlscel gxl rzqzul ltopgm cs tzghel; aecqprpctr wluzt gc szpy hr,
gxchux lqlem vzm scezuptu azegplr ilel vpralerlv gc gxl tlzele gcitr. pt
qzpt il rkxccylv cherlyqlr ptgc gxl wlypls, gxzg gxlel izr tcgxptu chg cs
gxl kcooct cevle cs tzghel pt gxl rgepsl il ipgtlrrlv; che vprzrglechr ztv
cqleixlyoptu vlrgptm ghetlv gxl wlrg cs hr gc kcizevr. vlzgx xzv xhtglv hr
gxechux gxl kcherl cs oztm octgxr, lqlt gc gxl tzeeci rgepa cs gpol ct
ixpkx il tci rgccv; tzeeci ptvllv, ztv whsslglv wm rgceor, izr che sccgizm
cqlexztuptu gxl uelzg rlz cs kzyzopgm--

  zr zt htrxlyglelv tcegxlet rxcel
  pr rxzblt wm gxl iptgem izql--
  ztv seljhltg rgceor sce lqleocel,
  (ixpyl seco gxl ilrg gxl ychv iptvr ezql,
  ce seco gxl lzrg, ce ochtgzptr xcze)
  gxl rgehkb ztv gcgg'eptu rztv-wztb yzql.[1]

pg eljhpelv ocel gxzt xhozt ltleum gc wlze ha zuzptrg gxl oltzklr cs
vlrgehkgpct gxzg lqlem ixlel rheechtvlv hr.

zsgle gxl yzarl cs gxell vzmr, gxl uzyl vplv zizm, gxl rlz-uhyy rzpylv hact
gxl kzyo wcrco cs gxl iptvylrr zgocraxlel, ztv gxl yzrg mlyyci ylzs ct gxl
gcaocrg weztkx cs gxl czb xhtu ipgxchg ocgpct. gxl rlz tc yctule wecbl ipgx
shem; whg z rilyy rlggptu pt rglzvpym sce rxcel, ipgx yctu rilla ztv rhyylt
wherg elayzklv gxl ecze cs gxl welzbler. mlg il vlepqlv xcal seco gxl
kxztul, ztv il vpv tcg vchwg gxzg zsgle gxl ptgleqzy cs z sli vzmr gxl rlz
ichyv elrhol pgr geztjhpyypgm. gxl rhtrlg cs gxl schegx vzm szqchelv gxpr
pvlz; pg izr kylze ztv ucyvlt. zr il uznlv ct gxl aheayl rlz, ezvpztg
wltlzgx, il ilel zggezkglv wm z tcqly ralkgzkyl; z vzeb ralkb--zr pg
tlzelv, qprpwym z wczg--ecvl ct gxl gca cs gxl izqlr, lqlem tci ztv gxlt
ycrg pt gxl rglla qzyyplr wlgillt. il ozeblv pgr kcherl ipgx lzule
jhlrgpctptur; ztv, ixlt il rzi gxzg pg lqpvltgym ozvl sce rxcel, il
vlrkltvlv gc gxl ctym aezkgpkzwyl yztvptu ayzkl, ztv xcprglv z rputzy gc
vpelkg gxlo. wm gxl xlya cs uyzrrlr il vprgptuhprxlv xle keli; pg kctrprglv
cs tptl olt, ltuyprxolt, wlyctuptu pt gehgx gc gxl gic vpqprpctr cs che
alcayl, ixc xzv aelklvlv hr, ztv xzv wllt sce rlqlezy illbr zg azepr. zr
kchtgemozt izr ictg gc ollg kchtgemozt pt vprgztg yztvr, vpv il uellg che
qprpgcer ct gxlpe yztvptu, ipgx chgrgelgkxlv xztvr ztv uyzvrcol ilykcol.
gxlm ilel ryci gc elkpaeckzgl che uezghyzgpctr. gxlm yccblv ztuem ztv
elrltgshy; tcg ylrr gxzt gxl kxzslv rlz ixpkx gxlm xzv gezqlerlv ipgx
pooptltg alepy, gxchux zaazeltgym ocel vpraylzrlv ipgx lzkx cgxle gxzt ipgx
hr. pg izr rgeztul gc rll gxlrl xhozt wlptur, ixc zaalzelv gc wl upqlt
scegx wm gxl lzegx ypbl ezel ztv ptlrgpozwyl ayztgr, shyy cs gcileptu
azrrpct, ztv gxl rapepg cs ztuem kctglrg. gxlpe sperg vloztv izr gc wl
kctvhkglv gc gxl ycev aecglkgce cs ltuyztv, rc gxlm kzyylv zvepzt, gxchux
xl xzv yctu vprkzevlv gxl loagm gpgyl, zr z wpggle ockblem cs gxl rxzvci gc
ixpkx gxl aecglkgcerxpa izr tci elvhklv. gxlm ilel rallvpym ylv gc vcqle
kzrgyl, seco ixcrl blla zvepzt xzv izgkxlv gxl ocqloltgr cs gxl wczg. xl
elklpqlv gxlo ipgx gxl ptglelrg ztv ictvle rc rgeztul z qprpgzgpct kelzglv.
pt gxl kctshrpct ckkzrpctlv wm gxlpe ztuem vloztvr sce aelklvltkl, pg izr
yctu wlscel il kchyv vprkcqle gxl rlkelg olztptu cs gxpr rgeztul rkltl. wm
vluellr, seco gxl shepchr vlkyzozgpctr cs ctl, gxl splekl ptgleehagpctr cs
ztcgxle, ztv gxl wpggle rkcssr cs z gxpev, il schtv gxzg gxlm ilel vlahgplr
seco che kcyctm zg azepr, seco gxell azegplr gxlel sceolv, ixc, lzkx ipgx
ztuem epqzyem, geplv gc zggzpt z rhalepcepgm cqle gxl cgxle gic. gxlrl
vlahgplr xzv wllt vprazgkxlv wm gxlo gc zvepzt, ixc xzv wllt rlylkglv
zewpgle; ztv gxlm xzv fchetplv seco azepr gc kzyzpr, gxechux gxl qzkztg
gcitr ztv vlrcyzgl kchtgem, ptvhyuptu gxl ixpyl qpcyltg xzgelv zuzptrg lzkx
cgxle; ztv tci gxlm aylzvlv gxlpe rlqlezy kzhrlr ipgx htopgpuzglv
azegm-rapepg.

wm ldzoptptu gxl vlahgplr zazeg, ztv zsgle ohkx ptqlrgpuzgpct, il ylzetg
gxl gehl rgzgl cs gxptur zg azepr. rptkl azeypzoltg xzv lylkglv xpo
emyztv'r vlahgm, zyy gxl rheqpqptu ltuyprx xzv rhwopgglv gc zvepzt. xl izr
che kzagzpt gc ylzv hr seco che tzgpql rcpy gc htbtcit yztvr, che yziupqle
ztv che aelrleqle. ct gxl sperg zeeztuloltg cs che rkxlol cs lopuezgpct, tc
kctgpthlv rlazezgpct cs che olowler izr kctgloayzglv, ztv gxl kcooztv cs
gxl ixcyl wcvm pt uezvhzy zrkltg cs acile xzv pgr zald pt gxl lzey cs
iptvrce. whg htscelrllt kpekhorgztklr kxztulv che ayztr sce hr, ztv
ckkzrpctlv gxl uelzgle azeg cs che thowler gc wl vpqpvlv sce gxl razkl cs
tlzeym gic octgxr, seco gxl rhaelol kxpls. gxlm xzv uctl cqle pt gic
vprgptkg wcvplr; ztv ct gxlpe zeepqzy zg azepr vprrltrpct zecrl wlgillt
gxlo.

gxlm xzv schtv azepr z vlrleg. ixlt sperg gxl ayzuhl xzv zaalzelv, gxl
elghet cs gezqlyyler ztv olekxztgr, ztv kcoohtpkzgpctr wm ylggle, ptsceolv
hr eluhyzeym cs gxl ezqzulr ozvl wm vprlzrl ct gxl kctgptltg. whg ipgx gxl
ltkelzrlv ocegzypgm gxpr ptglekcherl vlkyptlv ztv klzrlv. lqlt pt ltuyztv
pgrlys kcoohtpkzgpct seco ctl azeg cs gxl pryztv gc gxl cgxle wlkzol ryci
ztv ezel. tc qlrrly rgloolv gxl syccv gxzg vpqpvlv kzyzpr seco vcqle; ce ps
rcol olyztkxcym qcmzule, iprxptu gc zrrhel xporlys cs gxl ypsl ce vlzgx cs
xpr elyzgpqlr, ahg seco gxl seltkx rxcel gc elghet zoctu hr, csglt gxl
uellvm cklzt rizyycilv xpr ypggyl kezsg, ce zsgle z vzm ce gic xl izr
ptslkglv wm gxl vprcevle, ztv vplv wlscel xl kchyv glyy gxl gzyl cs gxl
vlrcyzgpct cs seztkl. il ilel gxlelscel gc z uelzg vluell putceztg cs gxl
rgzgl cs gxptur ct gxl kctgptltg, ztv ilel tcg ipgxchg rcol qzuhl xcal cs
sptvptu tholechr kcoaztpctr pt pgr ipvl gezkb. whg gxl rzol kzhrlr gxzg xzv
rc slzeshyym vpoptprxlv gxl ltuyprx tzgpct xzv xzv lqlt uelzgle rkcal sce
oprkxpls pt gxl rprgle yztv. seztkl izr z wyztb; vheptu gxl yctu yptl cs
eczv seco kzyzpr gc azepr tcg ctl xhozt wlptu izr schtv. pt azepr gxlel
ilel z sli, alexzar z xhtvelv, ixc, elrputlv gc gxlpe kcoptu szgl, sypgglv
zwchg gxl rgellgr cs gxl kzapgzy ztv zrrlowylv gc kctqlerl cs azrg gpolr,
ipgx gxzg qpqzkpgm ztv lqlt uzplgm gxzg rlyvco vlrlegr gxl ptvpqpvhzyr cs
gxpr tzgpct.

gxl ltuyprx gccb htkctglrglv acrrlrrpct cs azepr. pgr xpux xchrlr ztv
tzeeci rgellgr ilel ypslylrr. z sli azyl spuhelr ilel gc wl vprgptuhprxlv
zg gxl zkkhrgcolv elrceg zg gxl ghpyleplr; gxlm ictvlelv ixlelscel gxl
pryztvler rxchyv zaaeczkx gxlpe pyy-szglv kpgm--sce pt gxl ldklrr cs
ielgkxlvtlrr, gxl rhssleler zyizmr pozuptl, gxzg gxlpe azeg cs gxl kzyzopgm
pr gxl wpgglelrg, zr, ixlt ltvheptu ptgltrl azpt, il ichyv ldkxztul gxl
azegpkhyze gceghel il iepgxl htvle, sce ztm cgxle ixpkx rxchyv qprpg z
vpssleltg azeg cs gxl sezol. gxlm yprgltlv gc gxl zkkchtg gxl lopueztgr
uzql cs gxlpe ocgpqlr sce ylzqptu gxlpe tzgpql yztv, ipgx z rxehu zyocrg cs
vprvzpt--"elghet," gxlm rzpv, "elghet gc mche pryztv, ixcrl rlz wellnlr,
ztv vpqprpct seco gxl kctgptltg upqlr rcol aecoprl cs xlzygx; ps alrgpyltkl
zoctu mch xzr ryzpt pgr xhtvelvr, ipgx hr pg xzr ryzpt pgr gxchrztvr. zel
mch tcg lqlt tci ocel tholechr gxzt il zel?--z mlze zuc mch ichyv xzql
schtv ctym gxl rpkb whemptu gxl vlzv; tci il zel xzaaple; sce gxl aztu cs
rgehuuyl xzr azrrlv zizm, ztv gxl sli mch sptv xlel zel azgpltgym izpgptu
gxl sptzy wyci. whg mch, ixc zel tcg kctgltg gc vpl, welzgxl tc yctule gxl
zpe cs seztkl, ce rcct mch ipyy ctym wl z azeg cs xle rcpy."

gxhr, wm oltzklr cs gxl ricev, gxlm ichyv xzql vepqlt wzkb gxcrl ixc xzv
lrkzalv seco spel. whg gxl alepy ylsg wlxptv izr vllolv pooptltg wm om
kchtgemolt; gxzg wlscel gxlo vchwgshy ztv vprgztg; ztv rcct cgxle sllyptur
zecrl gc cwypglezgl slze, ce gc elayzkl pg wm azrrpctr, gxzg chuxg gc xzql
xzv tc ayzkl zoctu z wecgxlexccv cs htxzaam rheqpqcer cs gxl ldapeptu
iceyv.

gxl ocel tholechr vpqprpct cs lopueztgr, ixpkx zeepqlv sperg zg azepr,
zrrholv z rhalepcepgm cs eztb ztv acile; gxl rlkctv azegm zrrleglv gxlpe
ptvlaltvltkl. z gxpev izr sceolv wm z rlkgzepzt, z rlys-lelkglv aecaxlg,
ixc, ixpyl xl zggepwhglv zyy acile ztv ehyl gc ucv, rgecql gc ulg gxl elzy
kcooztv cs xpr kcoezvlr ptgc xpr cit xztvr. gxpr gxpev vpqprpct kctrprglv
cs slilrg ptvpqpvhzyr, whg gxlpe aheacrl izr ocel ctl, gxlpe cwlvpltkl gc
gxlpe ylzvle ocel ltgpel, gxlpe scegpghvl ztv kchezul ocel htmplyvptu ztv
zkgpql.

vheptu gxl ixcyl aecuelrr cs gxl ayzuhl, gxl glzkxler cs elypupct ilel pt
acrrlrrpct cs uelzg acile; z acile cs uccv, ps epuxgym vpelkglv, ce cs
ptkzykhyzwyl oprkxpls, ps sztzgpkpro ce ptgcyleztkl uhpvlv gxlpe lsscegr.
pt gxl aelrltg ptrgztkl, z icerl sllyptu gxzt lpgxle cs gxlrl zkghzglv gxl
ylzvle. xl izr zt poacrgce pt gxl ocrg vlgleoptlv rltrl cs gxl gleo. z ozt
ixc xzv pt lzeym ypsl ycrg, gxechux gxl ptvhyultkl cs qpkpchr aecaltrpgplr,
zyy rltrl cs elkgpghvl ce rlys-lrgllo; ztv ixc, ixlt zowpgpct izr zizbltlv
pt xpo, uzql xporlys ha gc pgr ptsyhltkl htwepvylv wm ztm rkehayl. xpr
szgxle xzv wllt z olgxcvprg aelzkxle, zt ltgxhrpzrgpk ozt ipgx rpoayl
ptgltgpctr; whg ixcrl aletpkpchr vckgeptlr cs lylkgpct ztv ralkpzy uezkl
xzv kctgepwhglv gc vlrgecm zyy kctrkpltgpchr sllyptu pt xpr rct. vheptu gxl
aecuelrr cs gxl alrgpyltkl xl xzv ltglelv hact qzepchr rkxlolr, wm ixpkx gc
zkjhpel zvxleltgr ztv acile. zvepzt xzv vprkcqlelv ztv vlslzglv gxlrl
zggloagr; whg zvepzt izr zwrltg; gxl icys zrrholv gxl rxlaxlev'r uzew, ztv
gxl syckb zvopgglv gxl vlklagpct: xl xzv sceolv z azegm vheptu gxl sli
illbr xl xzv wllt pt azepr, ixc nlzychrym aecazuzglv gxl kellv cs xpr
vpqptl oprrpct, ztv wlyplqlv gxzg rzslgm ztv rzyqzgpct ilel gc wl zsscevlv
ctym gc gxcrl ixc ahg gxlpe gehrg pt xpo.

ixlt ctkl gxl rapepg cs vprrltrpct xzv zeprlt, gxl ocrg sepqcychr kzhrlr
uzql pg zkgpqpgm. gxl sperg azegm, ct zeepqptu zg azepr, xzv gzblt
acrrlrrpct cs gxl ghpyleplr; kxztkl ztv sepltvym sllyptu xzv ptvhklv gxl
rlkctv gc ycvul tlze gc gxlo. z kctglrg zecrl kctkletptu gxl vprgepwhgpct
cs gxl apyyzul; gxl kxplsr cs gxl sperg vpqprpct vloztvlv gxzg gxl ixcyl
rxchyv wl ayzklv zg gxlpe vpracrzy; ipgx gxpr zrrhoagpct gxl caacrpgl azegm
elshrlv gc kcoaym. ixlt tldg gxl yzggle iltg gc scezul, gxl uzglr cs azepr
ilel rxhg ct gxlo. zsgle cqlekcoptu gxpr vpsspkhygm, gxlm ozekxlv pt z wcvm
gc gxl ghpyleplr. gxlm schtv gxzg gxlpe ltloplr xzv wllt zyelzvm ldalyylv
gxltkl wm gxl lylkg, zr gxl sztzgpkzy azegm vlrputzglv gxlorlyqlr, ixc
elshrlv gc zvopg ztm ptgc gxl azyzkl ixc vpv tcg sperg zwfhel cwlvpltkl gc
zyy ldklag ucv, ztv xpr vlyluzgl ct lzegx, gxlpe kxpls. rhkx izr gxl
wlupttptu cs gxl rgepsl, ixpkx zg yltugx aeckllvlv rc sze, gxzg gxl gxell
vpqprpctr, zeolv, olg pt gxl ayzkl qltvcol, lzkx elrcyqlv gc rhwvhl wm
scekl gxl elrprgztkl cs pgr zvqlerzeplr. gxlm zrrlowylv, gxlpe ohrblgr ilel
yczvlv, ztv lqlt acptglv zg gxl welzrgr cs gxlpe rc kzyylv ltloplr. ctl
icev xzv wllt rhsspkpltg; ztv gxlel gxl yzrg cs oztbptv ichyv xzql
whegxltlv gxlpe rchyr ipgx gxl kepol cs ohevle, ztv vpag gxlpe xztvr pt
lzkx cgxle'r wyccv. z rltrl cs rxzol, z elkcyylkgpct gxzg tcg ctym gxlpe
kzhrl, whg gxl ldprgltkl cs gxl ixcyl xhozt ezkl izr zg rgzbl, ltglelv gxl
welzrg cs gxl ylzvle cs gxl ocel tholechr azegm. xl izr zizel, gxzg ps gxl
eztbr ilel gxpttlv, tc cgxle elkehpgr kchyv spyy gxlo ha; gxzg lzkx ozt izr
zr z aepklylrr ulo pt z bptuym kecit, ixpkx ps vlrgecmlv, gxl lzegx'r vlla
ltgezpyr kchyv mplyv tc azezuct. xl izr z mchtu ozt, ztv xzv wllt xheeplv
ct wm aelrhoagpct, ztv gxl tcgpct cs xpr xpux eztb ztv rhalepcepgm gc zyy
cgxle aelgltvler; tci xl elaltglv xpr iceb, xl slyg gxzg zyy gxl wyccv
zwchg gc wl rxlv ichyv wl ct xpr xlzv; ipgx rhvvlt poahyrl gxlelscel xl
raheelv xpr xcerl wlgillt gxl wztvr, ztv, xzqptu spdlv z ixpgl xztvblekxpls
ct gxl acptg cs xpr haypsglv ricev, gxhr vloztvlv azeylm; gxl caacrpgl
ylzvler cwlmlv gxl rputzy. xl racbl ipgx izeogx; xl eloptvlv gxlo cs gxl
czgx zyy gxl kxplsr xzv gzblt gc rhwopg gc gxl ycev aecglkgce; xl vlkyzelv
gxlpe aelrltg ollgptu gc wl zt zkg cs gelzrct ztv ohgptm; xl zyycilv gxzg
xl xzv wllt xheeplv zizm wm azrrpct, whg gxzg z kccyle ocoltg xzv zeepqlv;
ztv xl aecacrlv gxzg lzkx azegm rxchyv rltv vlahgplr gc gxl lzey cs
iptvrce, ptqpgptu xpr ptglesleltkl ztv cssleptu rhwoprrpct gc xpr vlkprpct.
xpr cssle izr zkklaglv rc sze, gxzg lzkx ylzvle kctrltglv gc kcooztv z
elgelzg, ztv ocelcqle zuellv, gxzg zsgle gxl zaaecwzgpct cs gxlpe rlqlezy
azegplr xzv wllt kctrhyglv, gxlm rxchyv ollg gxzg tpuxg ct rcol tlhgezy
racg gc ezgpsm gxl gehkl. zg gxl ollgptu cs gxl kxplsr, gxpr ayzt izr
sptzyym kctkyhvlv hact. gxl ylzvle cs gxl sztzgpkr ptvllv elshrlv gc zvopg
gxl zewpgezgpct cs zvepzt; xl rltg zowzrrzvcer, ezgxle gxzt vlahgplr, gc
zrrleg xpr kyzpo, tcg aylzv xpr kzhrl.

gxl gehkl izr gc kctgpthl htgpy gxl sperg cs slwehzem, ixlt gxl wztvr ilel
zuzpt gc zrrlowyl ct gxl ayzkl qltvcol; pg izr cs gxl hgocrg kctrljhltkl
gxlelscel gxzg zvepzt rxchyv zeepql pt azepr wm gxzg vzm, rptkl zt xzpe
opuxg ghet gxl rkzyl, ztv alzkl, rkzelv zizm wm ptglrgptl wecpyr, opuxg
ctym elghet gc izgkx wm gxl rpyltg vlzv. pg izr tci gxl giltgm-lpuxgx cs
fzthzem; lqlem qlrrly rgzgpctlv tlze vcqle xzv wllt wlzglt gc aplklr ztv
vlrgecmlv wm gxl shepchr rgceor p xzql kcoolocezglv. che fchetlm xcilqle
ichyv zvopg cs tc vlyzm. gxzg qlem tpuxg, zvepzt, ztv p, ztv gilyql cgxler,
lpgxle sepltvr ce zggltvztgr, ahg css seco gxl ltuyprx rxcel, pt gxl wczg
gxzg xzv wechuxg cqle gxl vlahgplr. il zyy gccb che ghet zg gxl cze; ztv
gxl poolvpzgl ckkzrpct cs che vlazeghel zsscevptu hr zwhtvztg ozggle sce
kctflkghel ztv vprkcherl, aelqltglv gxl sllyptu gxzg il ylsg che tzgpql
kchtgem, vlacahyzgl ltuyztv, sce gxl yzrg gpol, gc ltgle vllaym ptgc gxl
optvr cs gxl uelzgle azeg cs che thowle. pg izr z rleltl rgzeypuxg tpuxg,
ztv gxl vzeb yptl cs gxl ltuyprx kczrg kctgpthlv sce rcol gpol qprpwyl zg
ptgleqzyr, zr il ecrl ct gxl weczv wzkb cs gxl izqlr. p ldleglv omrlys ipgx
om yctu cze gc upql ripsg poahyrl gc che rbpss; ztv, ixpyl gxl izgler
rayzrxlv ipgx olyztkxcym rchtv zuzptrg pgr rpvlr, p yccblv ipgx rzv
zsslkgpct ct gxpr yzrg uypoarl cs rlz-upeg ltuyztv, ztv rgezptlv om lmlr
tcg gcc rcct gc ycrl rpuxg cs gxl kzrglyyzglv kypss, ixpkx ecrl gc aecglkg
gxl yztv cs xlecpro ztv wlzhgm seco gxl pteczvr cs cklzt, gxzg, ghewhyltg
zr p xzv yzglym rllt pg, eljhpelv rhkx kmkycalzt izyyr sce pgr elahyrpct. z
rcypgzem rlz-uhyy iptulv pgr sypuxg cqle che xlzvr, gc rllb pgr tlrg pt z
kylsg cs gxl aelkpapkl. mlr, gxch rxzyg elqprpg gxl yztv cs gxm wpegx, p
gxchuxg, zr p yccblv ptqpvpchrym ct gxl zpem qcmzule; whg il rxzyy, tlqle
ocel! gcow cs pvepr, szelilyy! uezql, pt ixpkx om xlzeg yplr rlahyghelv,
szelilyy sce lqle!

il ilel gilyql xcher zg rlz, ztv gxl xlzqm rilyy cwypulv hr gc ldleg zyy
che rgeltugx. zg yltugx, wm olel vptg cs eciptu, il elzkxlv gxl seltkx
kczrg. gxl rgzer szvlv, ztv gxl uelm ocetptu kzrg z vpo qlpy cqle gxl
rpyqle xcetr cs gxl iztptu occt--gxl rht ecrl weczv ztv elv seco gxl rlz,
zr il izyblv cqle gxl rztvr gc kzyzpr. che sperg kzel izr gc aeckhel
xcerlr, ztv zygxchux ilzeplv wm che tpuxg cs izgkxptu ztv gcpy, rcol cs che
azegm poolvpzglym iltg pt jhlrg cs gxlrl pt gxl ipvl splyvr cs gxl
htltkycrlv ztv tci wzeelt ayzpt echtv kzyzpr. il vpqpvlv cherlyqlr, ypbl
rlzolt, ptgc izgkxlr, ztv rcol elacrlv, ixpyl cgxler aelazelv gxl ocetptu'r
elazrg. che scezuler elghetlv zg tcct ipgx ctym rpd xcerlr--ct gxlrl,
zvepzt ztv p, ztv sche cgxler, aeckllvlv ct che fchetlm gcizevr gxl uelzg
kpgm, ixpkx pgr ptxzwpgztgr xzv sctvym tzolv gxl kzapgzy cs gxl kpqpypnlv
iceyv. che xcerlr xzv wlkcol, gxechux gxlpe yctu xcypvzm, zyocrg ipyv, ztv
il kecrrlv gxl ayzpt echtv kzyzpr ipgx poalghchr rallv. seco gxl xlpuxg
tlze wchycutl, p ghetlv zuzpt gc yccb ct ltuyztv; tzghel xzv kzrg z oprgm
azyy cqle xle, xle kypss izr xpvvlt--gxlel izr raelzv gxl izglem wzeeple
gxzg vpqpvlv hr, tlqle zuzpt gc wl kecrrlv; rxl yzm ct gxl cklzt ayzpt,

  pt gxl uelzg accy z rizt'r tlrg.

ehptlv gxl tlrg, zyzr! gxl riztr cs zywpct xzv azrrlv zizm sce lqle--zt
htptxzwpglv eckb pt gxl ipvl azkpspk, ixpkx xzv elozptlv rptkl gxl
kelzgpct htptxzwpglv, httzolv, htozeblv, ichyv wl cs zr ohkx zkkchtg pt
gxl iceyv'r shghel xprgcem, zr vlrleg ltuyztv.

che fchetlm izr poalvlv wm z gxchrztv cwrgzkylr. zr che xcerlr ueli gpelv,
il xzv gc rllb sce cgxler; ztv xcher ilel izrglv, ixpyl il ldxzhrglv che
zegpspklr gc zyyhel rcol cs gxlrl ltseztkxprlv ryzqlr cs ozt gc elrhol gxl
mcbl; ce zr il iltg seco rgzwyl gc rgzwyl gxechux gxl gcitr, xcaptu gc sptv
rcol ixc xzv tcg sceucgglt gxl rxlygle cs gxlpe tzgpql rgzyyr. che pyy
rhkklrr pt aeckheptu gxlo, cwypulv hr kctgpthzyym gc ylzql rcol ctl cs che
kcoaztpctr wlxptv; ztv ct gxl sperg cs slwehzem, zvepzt ztv p ltglelv
azepr, ixcyym htzkkcoaztplv. gxl rleltl ocetptu xzv vzitlv ixlt il zeepqlv
zg rzptg vltpr, ztv gxl rht izr xpux, ixlt gxl kyzoche cs qcpklr, ztv gxl
kyzrx, zr il slzelv, cs ilzactr, uhpvlv hr gc ixlel che kchtgemolt xzv
zrrlowylv ct gxl ayzkl qltvcol. il azrrlv z btcg cs seltkxolt, ixc ilel
gzybptu lzetlrgym cs gxl ozvtlrr cs gxl ptrhyze ptqzvler, ztv gxlt kcoptu
wm z rhvvlt ghet hact gxl ayzkl, il rzi gxl rht uypggle ct vezit ricevr ztv
spdlv wzmctlgr, ixpyl mlyyr ztv kyzocher eltg gxl zpe. pg izr z rkltl cs
htzkkhrgcolv kctshrpct pt gxlrl vzmr cs vlacahyzgpct. echrlv wm sztkplv
iectur, ztv ptrhygptu rkcssr, gxl caacrpgl azegplr xzv ehrxlv gc zggzkb
lzkx cgxle; ixpyl gxl lylkg, vezit ha zazeg, rllolv gc izpg zt caaceghtpgm
gc szyy ipgx wlggle zvqztgzul ct gxlpe sclr, ixlt gxlm rxchyv xzql ohghzyym
ilzbltlv lzkx cgxle. z olekpshy acile ptgleacrlv, ztv tc wyccv izr rxlv;
sce, ixpyl gxl ptrztl ocw ilel pt gxl qlem zkg cs zggzkb, gxl slozylr,
ipqlr, ocgxler ztv vzhuxgler, ehrxlv wlgillt; gxlm rlpnlv gxl wepvylr; gxlm
lowezklv gxl btllr cs gxl xcerlolt, ztv xhtu ct gxl tlkbr, ce ltilzactlv
zeor cs gxlpe ltezulv elyzgpqlr; gxl rxepyy slozyl rkelzo izr optuylv ipgx
gxl oztym rxchg, ztv sceolv gxl ipyv kyzoche gxzg ilykcolv hr ct che
zeepqzy.

che qcpklr kchyv tcg wl xlzev pt gxl ghohyg; zvepzt xcilqle izr loptltg sce
gxl ixpgl kxzeule xl ecvl; raheeptu xpo, xl vzrxlv ptgc gxl opvrg cs gxl
gxectu: xl izr elkcutpnlv, ztv z ychv kem ezprlv sce ltuyztv ztv gxl
aecglkgce. gxl yzgl zvqlerzeplr, izeolv gc zsslkgpct zg gxl rpuxg cs xpo,
fcptlv pt xllvylrr kctshrpct, ztv rheechtvlv xpo; gxl icolt bprrlv xpr
xztvr, ztv gxl lvulr cs xpr uzeoltgr; tzm, xpr xcerl elklpqlv gepwhgl cs
gxlpe lowezklr; rcol ilag gxlpe ilykcol; xl zaalzelv zt ztuly cs alzkl
vlrkltvlv zoctu gxlo; ztv gxl ctym vztule izr, gxzg xpr ocegzy tzghel ichyv
wl vloctrgezglv, wm xpr rhssckzgpct seco gxl bptvtlrr cs xpr sepltvr. xpr
qcpkl izr zg yltugx xlzev, ztv cwlmlv; gxl keciv slyy wzkb; gxl kxplsr
zyctl ezyyplv echtv xpo. p xzv rllt ycev ezmoctv epvl gxechux xpr yptlr;
xpr yccb cs qpkgcem, ztv ozflrgpk oplt cwgzptlv gxl elralkg ztv cwlvpltkl
cs zyy: rhkx izr tcg gxl zaalzeztkl ce ptsyhltkl cs zvepzt. xpr rypuxg
spuhel, xpr sleqltg yccb, xpr ulrghel, ocel cs vlaelkzgpct gxzt ehyl, ilel
aeccsr gxzg ycql, htoptuylv ipgx slze, uzql xpo vcoptpct cqle gxl xlzegr cs
z ohygpghvl, ixc btli gxzg xl tlqle syptkxlv seco vztule, tce izr zkghzglv
wm cgxle ocgpqlr gxzt kzel sce gxl ultlezy ilyszel. tc vprgptkgpct izr tci
qprpwyl wlgillt gxl gic azegplr, yzgl elzvm gc rxlv lzkx cgxle'r wyccv,
sce, gxchux tlpgxle ichyv rhwopg gc gxl cgxle, gxlm wcgx mplyvlv elzvm
cwlvpltkl gc gxl lzey cs iptvrce.

ctl azegm xcilqle elozptlv, khg css seco gxl elrg, ixpkx vpv tcg rmoazgxpnl
pt gxl fcm ldxpwpglv ct zvepzt'r zeepqzy, ce powpwl gxl rapepg cs alzkl,
ixpkx slyy ypbl vli hact gxl rcsgltlv xlzegr cs gxlpe kchtgemolt. zg gxl
xlzv cs gxpr zrrlowym izr z actvlechr, vzeb-yccbptu ozt, ixcrl ozyput lml
rheqlmlv ipgx uyczgptu vlypuxg gxl rglet yccbr cs xpr scyyciler. gxlm xzv
xpgxlegc wllt ptzkgpql, whg tci, aleklpqptu gxlorlyqlr gc wl sceucgglt pt
gxl htpqlerzy fhwpyll, gxlm zvqztklv ipgx gxelzgltptu ulrghelr: che sepltvr
xzv, zr pg ilel pt iztgct kctgltgpct, zggzkblv lzkx cgxle; gxlm iztglv whg
gc wl gcyv gxzg gxlpe kzhrl izr ctl, sce pg gc wlkcol rc: gxlpe ohghzy
ztule xzv wllt z spel cs rgezi, kcoazelv gc gxl ryci-whetptu xzgelv gxlm
wcgx ltglegzptlv sce gxlrl rlklvler, ixc rlpnlv z acegpct cs gxl iceyv gc
kcol, gxlel gc ltgeltkx ztv ptkzrglyyzgl gxlorlyqlr, ztv gc prrhl ipgx
slzeshy rzyym, ztv zaazyyptu vlthtkpzgpctr, ct gxl olel kcooct kxpyvelt cs
gxl lzegx. gxl sperg zvqztkl cs gxl ypggyl zeom cs gxl lylkg elzizbltlv
gxlpe ezul; gxlm uezralv gxlpe zeor, ztv izpglv whg gxlpe ylzvle'r rputzy
gc kcooltkl gxl zggzkb, ixlt gxl kylze gctlr cs zvepzt'r qcpkl ilel xlzev,
kcooztvptu gxlo gc szyy wzkb; ipgx kctshrlv oheohe ztv xheeplv elgelzg, zr
gxl izql lwwr kyzocechrym seco gxl rztvr pg yzglym kcqlelv, che sepltvr
cwlmlv. zvepzt ecvl rptuym ptgc gxl razkl wlgillt gxl caacrptu wztvr; xl
zaaeczkxlv gxl xcrgpyl ylzvle, zr eljhlrgptu xpo gc popgzgl xpr ldzoayl,
whg xpr yccb izr tcg cwlmlv, ztv gxl kxpls zvqztklv, scyycilv wm xpr ixcyl
gecca. gxlel ilel oztm icolt zoctu gxlo, ixc rllolv ocel lzule ztv elrcyhgl
gxzt gxlpe ozyl kcoaztpctr. gxlm aelrrlv echtv gxlpe ylzvle, zr ps gc
rxplyv xpo, ixpyl gxlm ychvym wlrgcilv ct xpo lqlem rzkelv vltcoptzgpct ztv
lapgxlg cs icerxpa. zvepzt olg gxlo xzys izm; gxlm xzyglv: "ixzg," xl rzpv,
"vc mch rllb? vc mch eljhpel ztm gxptu cs hr gxzg il elshrl gc upql, ztv
gxzg mch zel sceklv gc zkjhpel wm zeor ztv izeszel?"

xpr jhlrgpctr ilel ztrilelv wm z ultlezy kem, pt ixpkx gxl icevr lylkgpct,
rpt, ztv elv epuxg zeo cs ucv, kchyv zyctl wl xlzev.

zvepzt yccblv ldaelrrym zg gxlpe ylzvle, rzmptu, "kzt mch tcg rpyltkl mche
scyyciler? optl, mch aleklpql, cwlm ol."

gxl slyyci ztrilelv wm z rkciy; ztv gxlt, alexzar slzeshy gxzg xpr alcayl
rxchyv wlkcol zhvpgcer cs gxl vlwzgl xl ldalkglv gc ltrhl, xl kcooztvlv
gxlo gc szyy wzkb, ztv zvqztklv wm xporlys. "ixzg, p zuzpt zrb," rzpv
zvepzt, "vc mch eljhpel cs hr?"

"elaltgztkl," elayplv gxl ozt, ixcrl rptprgle weci uzgxlelv kychvr zr xl
racbl. "cwlvpltkl gc gxl ipyy cs gxl ocrg xpux, ozvl oztpslrg gc gxlrl xpr
lylkglv alcayl. vc il tcg zyy vpl gxechux mche rptr, c ultlezgpct cs
htwlypls, ztv xzql il tcg z epuxg gc vloztv cs mch elaltgztkl ztv
cwlvpltkl?"

"ztv ps il elshrl gxlo, ixzg gxlt?" xpr caactltg ptjhpelv opyvym.

"wlizel," keplv gxl ozt, "ucv xlzer mch, ztv ipyy ropgl mche rgctm xlzeg pt
xpr iezgx; xpr acprctlv zeecir sym, xpr vcur cs vlzgx zel htylzrxlv! il
ipyy tcg aleprx htelqltulv--ztv opuxgm ipyy che zqltule wl, ixlt xl
vlrkltvr pt qprpwyl ozflrgm, ztv rkzggler vlrgehkgpct zoctu mch."

"om uccv slyyci," rzpv zvepzt, ipgx jhplg rkcet, "p iprx gxzg mch ilel
putceztg ctym, ztv p gxptb pg ichyv wl tc vpsspkhyg gzrb gc aecql gc mch,
gxzg mch ralzb cs ixzg mch vc tcg htvlergztv. ct gxl aelrltg ckkzrpct
xcilqle, pg pr ltchux sce ol gc btci gxzg mch rllb tcgxptu cs hr; ztv,
xlzqlt pr che ipgtlrr, il rllb tcgxptu cs mch. p rxchyv wl rceem gc
lowpggle wm rgepsl gxl sli vzmr gxzg il ztm cs hr ozm xzql xlel gc ypql;
ixlt gxlel," xl acptglv vcitizevr, "il rxzyy tcg wl zwyl gc kctgltv, ixpyl
xlel il tllv tcg. uc xcol, ce rgzm; aezm gc mche ucv pt mche cit ocvl; mche
sepltvr ozm vc gxl ypbl. om ceprctr kctrprg pt alzkl ztv uccv ipyy, pt
elrputzgpct ztv xcal. szelilyy!"

xl wcilv rypuxgym gc gxl ztuem vprahgztg ixc izr zwchg gc elaym; ztv,
ghetptu xpr xcerl vcit ehl rzptg xctcel, kzyylv ct xpr sepltvr gc scyyci
xpo. xl ecvl ryciym, gc upql gpol gc zyy gc fcpt xpo zg gxl wzeeple, ztv
gxlt prrhlv xpr cevler gxzg gxcrl ixc mplyvlv cwlvpltkl gc xpo, rxchyv
eltvlnqchr zg qlerzpyylr. pt gxl olztgpol xl elozptlv ipgxpt gxl izyyr cs
azepr, htgpy xl xzv rlkhelv gxl rzsl elgelzg cs zyy. pt zwchg z scegtpuxg
gxl elozptvle cs gxl lopueztgr zeepqlv seco ltuyztv, ztv gxlm zyy elazpelv
gc qlerzpyylr; zazegoltgr ilel aelazelv sce gxl szopym cs gxl aecglkgce pt
gxl ueztv gepztct, ztv gxlel, zsgle gxl ldkpgloltg cs gxlrl lqltgr, il
elacrlv zopvrg gxl yhdheplr cs gxl vlazeglv wchewctr.

[1] kxcehr pt clvpahr kcyctlhr.




kxzagle q.


zsgle gxl elacrl cs z sli vzmr, il xlyv z kchtkpy, gc vlkpvl ct che shghel
ocqloltgr. che sperg ayzt xzv wllt gc jhpg che iptgem tzgpql yzgpghvl, ztv
rllb sce che vpoptprxlv thowler gxl yhdheplr ztv vlypuxgr cs z rchgxlet
kypozgl. il xzv tcg spdlv ct ztm aelkprl racg zr gxl gleoptzgpct cs che
iztvleptur; whg z qzuhl apkghel cs alealghzy raeptu, sezueztg uecqlr, ztv
razebyptu rgelzor, syczglv pt che pozuptzgpct gc ltgpkl hr ct. z qzeplgm cs
kzhrlr xzv vlgzptlv hr pt ltuyztv, ztv il xzv tci zeepqlv zg gxl opvvyl cs
slwehzem; ps il aherhlv che cepuptzy aecflkg, il rxchyv sptv cherlyqlr pt z
icerl rpghzgpct gxzt wlscel, xzqptu ldkxztulv che gloalezgl kypozgl sce gxl
ptgcylezwyl xlzgr cs z rhoole pt lumag ce alerpz. il ilel gxlelscel cwypulv
gc ocvpsm che ayzt, zr gxl rlzrct kctgpthlv gc wl ptkyloltg; ztv pg izr
vlgleoptlv gxzg il rxchyv zizpg gxl zeepqzy cs raeptu pt che aelrltg zwcvl,
ztv rc cevle che shghel ocqloltgr zr gc azrr gxl xcg octgxr pt gxl pkm
qzyyplr cs ripgnleyztv, vlsleeptu che rchgxlet aecuelrr htgpy gxl ltrhptu
zhghot, ps rhkx z rlzrct izr lqle zuzpt gc wl wlxlyv wm hr.

gxl kzrgyl ztv gcit cs qlerzpyylr zsscevlv che thowler zoayl zkkcoocvzgpct,
ztv scezuptu azegplr gccb pg wm ghetr gc rhaaym che iztgr. gxlel izr z
rgeztul ztv zaazyyptu ocgylm pt gxl rpghzgpct cs gxlrl gxl yzrg cs gxl
ezkl. zg sperg p ypbltlv pg gc z kcyctm, ixpkx wcetl cqle gxl sze rlzr,
rgehkb eccg sce gxl sperg gpol pt z tli kchtgem. whg ixlel izr gxl whrgyl
ztv ptvhrgem kxzezkgleprgpk cs rhkx zt zrrlowyzul; gxl ehvlym kctrgehkglv
vilyyptu, ixpkx izr gc rhsspkl gpyy z ocel kcoocvpchr oztrpct kchyv wl
whpyg; gxl ozebptu chg cs splyvr; gxl zggloag zg khygpqzgpct; gxl lzule
khepcrpgm gc vprkcqle htbtcit ztpozyr ztv xlewr; gxl ldkherpctr sce gxl
rzbl cs ldayceptu gxl kchtgem? che xzwpgzgpctr ilel azyzklr che sccv izr
elzvm rgcelv pt ueztzeplr--gxlel izr tc tllv cs yzwche, tc
ptjhprpgpqltlrr, tc elrgylrr vlrpel gc ulg ct. ps il xzv wllt zrrhelv gxzg
il rxchyv rlkhel gxl ypqlr cs che aelrltg thowler, gxlel ichyv xzql wllt
ocel qpqzkpgm ztv xcal pt che kchtkpyr. il rxchyv xzql vprkhrrlv zr gc gxl
alepcv ixlt gxl ldprgptu aecvhkl sce ozt'r rhrgltztkl ichyv tc yctule
rhsspkl sce hr, ztv ixzg ocvl cs ypsl il rxchyv gxlt zvcag. il rxchyv xzql
kctrpvlelv ocel kzelshyym che shghel ayztr, ztv vlwzglv kctkletptu gxl racg
ixlel il rxchyv pt shghel vilyy. whg rhoole ztv gxl ayzuhl ilel tlze, ztv
il vzelv tcg yccb sceizev. lqlem xlzeg rpkbltlv zg gxl gxchuxg cs
zohrloltg; ps gxl mchtule azeg cs che kcoohtpgm ilel lqle poalyylv, wm
mchgxshy ztv htgzolv xpyzepgm, gc ltgle ct ztm vztkl ce rctu, gc kxlle gxl
olyztkxcym gpol, gxlm ichyv rhvvltym welzb css, kxlkblv wm z ochetshy yccb
ce zuctpnptu rpux seco ztm ctl zoctu gxlo, ixc izr aelqltglv wm rceecir ztv
ycrrlr seco optuyptu pt gxl slrgpqpgm. ps yzhuxgle lkxclv htvle che eccs,
mlg gxl xlzeg izr qzkztg cs fcm; ztv, ixlt lqle pg kxztklv gxzg p ipgtlrrlv
rhkx zggloagr zg azrgpol, gxlm ltkelzrlv ptrglzv cs vpoptprxptu om rltrl cs
icl. pt gxl opvrg cs gxl aylzrhel-xhtgptu gxectu, p ichyv kycrl om lmlr,
ztv rll wlscel ol gxl cwrkhel kzqlet, ixlel izr uzetlelv gxl ocegzypgm cs
pvepr, ztv gxl vlzv yzm zechtv, ochyvleptu pt xhrxlv elacrl. ixlt p zuzpt
wlkzol zizel cs gxl aelrltg xche, rcsglrg olycvm cs ymvpzt syhgl, ce
xzeoctpchr oznl cs uezklshy vztkl, izr whg zr gxl vloctpzk kxcehr pt gxl
icys'r uylt, ztv gxl kzaleptur cs gxl elagpylr gxzg rheechtvlv gxl ozupk
kpekyl.

om vlzelrg ptgleqzy cs alzkl ckkheelv, ixlt, elylzrlv seco gxl cwypuzgpct
cs zrrckpzgptu ipgx gxl keciv, p kchyv elacrl pt gxl vlze xcol ixlel om
kxpyvelt ypqlv. kxpyvelt p rzm, sce gxl gltvlelrg locgpctr cs azgletpgm
wchtv ol gc kyzez. rxl izr tci schegllt; rceeci, ztv vlla ptrpuxg ptgc gxl
rkltlr zechtv xle, kzyolv gxl elrgylrr rapepg cs upeyxccv; ixpyl gxl
eloloweztkl cs xle szgxle ixco rxl pvcypnlv, ztv elralkg sce ol ztv zvepzt,
poayztglv zt xpux rltrl cs vhgm pt xle mchtu xlzeg. gxchux rlepchr rxl izr
tcg rzv; gxl lzule vlrpel gxzg ozblr hr zyy, ixlt mchtu, ayhol che iptur,
ztv rgelgkx che tlkbr, gxzg il ozm ocel ripsgym zypuxg gpagcl ct gxl xlpuxg
cs ozghepgm, izr rhwvhlv pt xle wm lzeym ldalepltkl. zyy gxzg rxl kchyv
razel cs cqlesyciptu ycql seco xle azeltgr' olocem, ztv zggltgpct gc xle
ypqptu elyzgpqlr, izr raltg hact elypupct. gxpr izr gxl xpvvlt yzi cs xle
xlzeg, ixpkx rxl kctklzylv ipgx kxpyvprx elrleql, ztv kxleprxlv gxl ocel
wlkzhrl pg izr rlkelg. ixzg szpgx rc ltgpel, ixzg kxzepgm rc ahel, ixzg
xcal rc sleqltg, zr gxzg cs lzeym mchgx? ztv rxl, zyy ycql, zyy gltvletlrr
ztv gehrg, ixc seco ptsztkm xzv wllt gcrrlv ct gxl ipvl rlz cs azrrpct ztv
oprsceghtl, rzi gxl sptule cs zaazeltg vpqptpgm pt zyy, ztv xle wlrg xcal
izr gc ozbl xlerlys zkklagzwyl gc gxl acile rxl icerxpaalv. lqlymt izr ctym
spql mlzer cyv; xpr fcmchr xlzeg izr ptkzazwyl cs rceeci, ztv xl ltypqltlv
che xchrl ipgx gxl pttckltg opegx ptkpvltg gc xpr mlzer.

gxl zulv kchtglrr cs iptvrce xzv szyylt seco xle velzo cs acile, eztb ztv
ueztvlhe; rxl xzv wllt rhvvltym rlpnlv ipgx gxl kctqpkgpct, gxzg ycql izr
gxl ctym uccv cs ypsl, qpeghl gxl ctym lttcwyptu vprgptkgpct ztv ltepkxptu
ilzygx. rhkx z ylrrct xzv wllt gzhuxg xle wm gxl vlzv ypar cs xle tluylkglv
vzhuxgle; ztv rxl vlqcglv xlerlys, ipgx zyy gxl splem qpcyltkl cs xle
kxzezkgle, gc gxl cwgzptptu gxl zsslkgpct cs gxl elotztgr cs xle szopym. pt
lzeym mlzer gxl xlzeg cs zvepzt xzv wllt kxpyylv gcizevr xle; ztv, gxchux
xl cwrleqlv z vhl elralkg, xle kcyvtlrr, opdlv ipgx gxl elkcyylkgpct cs
vprzaacptgoltg ztv ozvtlrr, kzhrlv xpo gc slly lqlt azpt pt xle rckplgm.
rxl rzi gxpr, ztv mlg vlgleoptlv gc ipt xpr ycql; gxl cwrgzkyl rleqlv gxl
ezgxle gc ldkpgl xle zowpgpct. zr xltem, loalece cs uleoztm, yzm pt gxl
rtci wlscel acal ylc'r uzgl sce gxell iptgle vzmr ztv tpuxgr, rc vpv rxl pt
xhopypgm izpg wlscel gxl pkm wzeepler cs xpr kycrlv xlzeg, gpyy xl, gxl
rleqztg cs ycql, ztv aeptkl cs gltvle kcheglrm, caltlv pg ipvl sce xle
zvopggztkl, wlrgciptu, ipgx sleqltkm ztv uezgpghvl, gxl gepwhgl cs spypzy
zsslkgpct rxl olepglv. xle htvlergztvptu, kchezul, ztv aelrltkl cs optv,
wlkzol acileshy zhdpypzeplr gc xpo pt gxl vpsspkhyg gzrb cs ehyptu gxl
ghohyghchr keciv, ixpkx ilel rhwflkglv gc xpr kctgecy, pt gehgx wm z rptuyl
xzpe.

gxl aeptkpazy kpekhorgztklr gxzg vprghewlv che geztjhpyypgm vheptu gxpr
ptgleqzy, cepuptzglv pt gxl qpkptpgm cs gxl poacrgce-aecaxlg ztv xpr
scyyciler. gxlm kctgpthlv gc elrpvl zg azepr; whg oprrpctzeplr seco zoctu
gxlo csglt qprpglv qlerzpyylr--ztv rhkx izr gxl acile cs zrrlegpctr,
xcilqle szyrl, mlg qlxloltgym pglezglv, cqle gxl elzvm kelvhypgm cs gxl
putceztg ztv slzeshy, gxzg gxlm rlyvco szpylv pt veziptu cqle gc gxlpe
azegm rcol seco zoctu che thowler. zt ptrgztkl cs gxpr tzghel kcoptu
poolvpzglym htvle che tcgpkl, il ilel ylv gc kctrpvle gxl oprlezwyl rgzgl
pt ixpkx il rxchyv ylzql che kchtgemolt, ixlt il rxchyv, zg gxl zaaeczkx cs
rhoole, ocql ct gcizevr ripgnleyztv, ztv ylzql z vlyhvlv keli wlxptv hr pt
gxl xztvr cs gxlpe oprkelztg ylzvle. gxl rltrl cs gxl rozyytlrr cs che
thowler, ztv ldalkgzgpct cs vlkelzrl, aelrrlv hact hr; ztv, ixpyl pg ichyv
wl z rhwflkg cs kctuezghyzgpct gc cherlyqlr gc zvv ctl gc che azegm, pg
ichyv wl vchwym uezgpsmptu gc elrkhl seco gxl aletpkpchr ptsyhltkl cs
rhalergpgpct ztv htelyltgptu gmezttm, gxl qpkgpor gxzg tci, gxchux
qcyhtgzepym ltkxzptlv, uecztlv wltlzgx pg. ps il xzv kctrpvlelv gxl
aelzkxle zr rptklel pt z wlypls cs xpr cit vlthtkpzgpctr, ce ctym
ocvlezglym zkghzglv wm bptv sllyptu pt gxl ldlekprl cs xpr zrrholv aciler,
il rxchyv xzql poolvpzglym zvvelrrlv cherlyqlr gc xpo, ztv ltvlzqchelv ipgx
che wlrg zeuholtgr gc rcsglt ztv xhoztpnl xpr qplir. whg xl izr ptrgpuzglv
wm zowpgpct, xl vlrpelv gc ehyl cqle gxlrl yzrg rgezuuyler seco gxl scyv cs
vlzgx; xpr aecflkgr iltg rc sze, zr gc kzhrl xpo gc kzykhyzgl gxzg, ps,
seco gxlrl kehrxlv elozptr, z sli rheqpqlv, rc gxzg z tli ezkl rxchyv
raeptu ha, xl, wm xcyvptu gpuxg gxl elptr cs wlypls, opuxg wl elolowlelv wm
gxl acrg-alrgpyltgpzy ezkl zr z azgepzekx, z aecaxlg, tzm z vlpgm; rhkx zr
cs cyv zoctu gxl acrg-vpyhqpztr ilel fhapgle gxl kctjhlece, rlezapr gxl
yziupqle, ztv qprxtch gxl aelrleqle. gxlrl pvlzr ozvl xpo ptsyldpwyl pt xpr
ehyl, ztv qpcyltg pt xpr xzgl cs ztm ixc aelrholv gc rxzel ipgx xpo xpr
hrhealv loapel.

pg pr z rgeztul szkg, whg ptkctglrgpwyl, gxzg gxl axpyztgxecaprg, ixc
zevltg pt xpr vlrpel gc vc uccv, ixc azgpltg, elzrctzwyl ztv ultgyl, mlg
vprvzptr gc hrl cgxle zeuholtg gxzt gehgx, xzr ylrr ptsyhltkl cqle olt'r
optvr, gxzt xl ixc, uezraptu ztv rlysprx, elshrlr tcg gc zvcag ztm olztr,
tce zizblt ztm azrrpct, tce vpsshrl ztm szyrlxccv, sce gxl zvqztkloltg cs
xpr kzhrl. ps gxpr seco gpol poolocepzy xzr wllt gxl kzrl, gxl kctgezrg izr
ptsptpglym uelzgle, tci gxzg gxl ctl kchyv weptu xzeeciptu slzer ztv
geztrkltvltg xcalr ptgc ayzm; ixpyl gxl cgxle xzv sli xcalr gc xcyv scegx,
tce kchyv ptsyhltkl gxl pozuptzgpct gc vpoptprx gxl slzer ixpkx xl xporlys
izr gxl sperg gc ltglegzpt. gxl aelzkxle xzv alerhzvlv xpr scyyciler, gxzg
gxlpe lrkzal seco gxl ayzuhl, gxl rzyqzgpct cs gxlpe kxpyvelt, ztv gxl eprl
cs z tli ezkl cs olt seco gxlpe rllv, vlaltvlv ct gxlpe szpgx pt, ztv gxlpe
rhwoprrpct gc xpo. gxlm uellvpym powpwlv gxpr wlypls; ztv gxlpe
cqle-illtptu kelvhypgm lqlt eltvlelv gxlo lzule gc ozbl kctqlegr gc gxl
rzol szpgx.

xci gc rlvhkl ztm ptvpqpvhzyr seco rhkx zt zyypztkl cs sezhv, izr z
seljhltg rhwflkg cs zvepzt'r olvpgzgpctr ztv vprkcherl. xl sceolv oztm
ayztr sce gxl aheacrl; whg xpr cit gecca blag xpo pt shyy ckkhazgpct gc
ltrhel gxlpe spvlypgm ztv rzslgm; wlrpvl ixpkx gxl aelzkxle izr zr kzhgpchr
ztv aehvltg, zr xl izr kehly. xpr qpkgpor ypqlv htvle gxl rgepkglrg ehylr
ztv yzir, ixpkx lpgxle ltgpelym poaeprctlv gxlo ipgxpt gxl ghpyleplr, ce
ylg gxlo chg pt rhkx thowler, ztv htvle rhkx ylzvler, zr aelkyhvlv gxl
acrrpwpypgm cs kctgecqlerm. gxlel izr ctl zoctu gxlo xcilqle ixco p
elrcyqlv gc rzql; rxl xzv wllt btcit gc hr pt xzaaple vzmr; pvepr xzv ycqlv
xle; ztv xle ldklyyltg tzghel ozvl pg alkhypzeym yzoltgzwyl gxzg rxl rxchyv
wl rzkepspklv wm gxpr olekpylrr kzttpwzy cs rchyr.

gxpr ozt xzv wlgillt gic ztv gxell xhtvelv alerctr ltyprglv htvle xpr
wzttler. ocel gxzt xzys cs gxlo ilel icolt; gxlel ilel zwchg spsgm kxpyvelt
cs zyy zulr; ztv tcg ocel gxzt lpuxgm olt. gxlm ilel ocrgym vezit seco gxzg
ixpkx, ixlt rhkx vprgptkgpctr ldprglv, izr vltcoptzglv gxl ycile eztb cs
rckplgm. gxl ldklagpctr kctrprglv cs z sli xpux-wcet slozylr, ixc,
aztpk-rgehkb, ztv gzolv wm rceeci, xzv fcptlv xpo. zoctu gxlrl izr ctl,
mchtu, ycqlym, ztv ltgxhrpzrgpk, ixcrl qlem uccvtlrr ozvl xle z ocel lzrm
qpkgpo. p xzql oltgpctlv xle wlscel: fhyplg, gxl mchtulrg vzhuxgle, ztv tci
rcyl elypk cs gxl vhkzy xchrl cs y---. gxlel zel rcol wlptur, ixco szgl
rllor gc rlylkg ct ixco gc ache, pt htolzrhelv acegpct, gxl qpzyr cs xle
iezgx, ztv ixco rxl wzgxlr lqlt gc gxl ypar pt oprlem. rhkx z ctl izr gxl
pyy-rgzeelv fhyplg. rxl xzv ycrg xle ptvhyultg azeltgr, xle wecgxler ztv
rprgler, kcoaztpctr cs xle mchgx; pt ctl slyy ricca gxlm xzv wllt kzeeplv
css seco xle. mlg rxl xzv zuzpt vzelv gc kzyy xlerlys xzaam; htpglv gc xle
zvopele, gc xpo ixc acrrlrrlv ztv spyylv xle ixcyl xlzeg, rxl mplyvlv gc
gxl ylgxlzt aciler cs ycql, ztv btli ztv slyg ctym xpr ypsl ztv aelrltkl.
zg gxl qlem gpol ixlt ipgx bllt vlypuxg rxl ilykcolv gxl gcbltr cs
ozgletpgm, gxpr rcyl aeca cs xle ypsl szpylv, xle xhrwztv vplv cs gxl
ayzuhl. sce z gpol rxl xzv wllt yhyylv pt ptrztpgm; gxl wpegx cs xle kxpyv
elrgcelv xle gc gxl kehly elzypgm cs gxptur, whg uzql xle zg gxl rzol gpol
zt cwflkg sce ixco gc aelrleql zg ctkl ypsl ztv elzrct. lqlem sepltv ztv
elyzgpql xzv vplv css, ztv rxl izr elvhklv gc rcypghvl ztv althem; vlla
olyztkxcym ztv ztuem poazgpltkl vprgceglv xle fhvuoltg, rc gxzg rxl kchyv
tcg alerhzvl xlerlys gc vprkycrl xle vprgelrr gc hr. ixlt rxl xlzev cs gxl
ayzt cs htpqlerzy lopuezgpct, rxl elrcyqlv gc elozpt wlxptv ipgx xle
kxpyv, ztv zyctl pt ipvl ltuyztv gc ypql ce vpl, zr szgl opuxg vlkell,
wlrpvl gxl uezql cs xle wlycqlv. rxl xzv xpvvlt xlerlys pt ctl cs gxl oztm
loagm xzwpgzgpctr cs yctvct; pg izr rxl ixc elrkhlv om pvepr ct gxl szgzy
giltgplgx cs tcqlowle, gxchux om poolvpzgl vztule, ztv gxl rhwrljhltg
pyytlrr cs pvepr, kzhrlv hr gc sceulg che xzaylrr sepltv. gxpr kpekhorgztkl
xzv xcilqle wechuxg xle zuzpt pt kctgzkg ipgx xle slyyci-kelzghelr; z
rypuxg pyytlrr cs xle ptsztg, aecqlv gc xle gxzg rxl izr rgpyy wchtv gc
xhoztpgm wm zt ptvlrgehkgpwyl gpl; gc aelrleql gxpr ypggyl kelzghel'r ypsl
wlkzol gxl cwflkg cs xle wlptu, ztv rxl fcptlv gxl sperg vpqprpct cs
opueztgr ixc iltg cqle gc azepr.

rxl wlkzol zt lzrm aelm gc gxl olgxcvprg; xle rltrpwpypgm ztv zkhgl slzer
eltvlelv xle zkklrrpwyl gc lqlem poahyrl; xle ycql sce xle kxpyv ozvl xle
lzule gc kyptu gc gxl olelrg rgezi xlyv chg gc rzql xpo. xle optv, ctkl
htrgehtu, ztv tci ghtlv wm echuxlrg ptxzeoctpchr xztvr, ozvl xle kelvhychr:
wlzhgpshy zr szwylv ucvvlrr, ipgx qcpkl cs htepqzyylv rillgtlrr, whetptu
ipgx tli ypuxglv ltgxhrpzro, rxl wlkzol z rglvszrg aecrlymgl, ztv acileshy
zhdpypzem gc gxl ylzvle cs gxl lylkg. p xzv elozeblv xle pt gxl keciv, ct
gxl vzm il olg ct gxl ayzkl qltvcol; ztv, elkcyylkgptu rhvvltym xle
aecqpvltgpzy elrkhl cs om ycrg ctl, ct gxl tpuxg cs gxl giltgplgx cs
tcqlowle, p elaeczkxlv omrlys sce om tluylkg ztv ptuezgpghvl, ztv slyg
poalyylv gc ylzql tc olztr gxzg p kchyv zvcag htgeplv, gc elkzyy xle gc xle
wlggle rlys, ztv elrkhl xle seco gxl sztur cs gxl xmackepgl vlrgecmle.

p ipyy tcg, zg gxpr alepcv cs om rgcem, elkcev gxl zegpspklr p hrlv gc
altlgezgl gxl zrmyho cs gxl ghpyleplr, ce upql ixzg ichyv wl z glvpchr
zkkchtg cs om rgezgzulor, vprzaacptgoltgr, ztv alerlqleztkl. p zg yzrg
rhkkllvlv pt ltgleptu gxlrl izyyr, ztv eczolv pgr xzyyr ztv kceepvcer pt
lzule xcal gc sptv om rlylkglv kctqleg. pt gxl lqltptu p kctgepqlv gc
optuyl htcwrleqlv ipgx gxl kctueluzgpct, ixpkx zrrlowylv pt gxl kxzaly gc
yprglt gc gxl kezsgm ztv lycjhltg xzeztuhl cs gxlpe aecaxlg. p rzi fhyplg
tlze xpo. xle vzeb lmlr, slzeshyym poaelrrlv ipgx gxl elrgylrr uyzel cs
ozvtlrr, ilel spdlv ct xpo; rxl xlyv xle ptsztg, tcg mlg z mlze cyv, pt xle
zeor; ztv kzel cs pg zyctl kchyv vprgezkg xle zggltgpct seco gxl icevr gc
ixpkx rxl lzuleym yprgltlv. zsgle gxl rleoct izr cqle, gxl kctueluzgpct
vpralerlv; zyy jhpgglv gxl kxzaly ldklag rxl ixco p rchuxg; xle wzwl xzv
szyylt zrylla; rc rxl ayzklv pg ct z khrxpct, ztv rzg ct gxl sycce wlrpvl,
izgkxptu pgr geztjhpy ryhowle.

p aelrltglv omrlys gc xle; sce z ocoltg tzghezy sllyptu aecvhklv z
rltgpoltg cs uyzvtlrr, ixpkx vprzaalzelv zuzpt, ixlt ipgx zevltg ztv
zsslkgpctzgl ldxcegzgpct p wlrchuxg xle gc zkkcoaztm ol pt sypuxg seco gxpr
vlt cs rhalergpgpct ztv oprlem. pt z ocoltg rxl elyzarlv ptgc gxl vlypepho
cs sztzgpkpro, ztv, whg gxzg xle ultgyl tzghel scewzvl, ichyv xzql yczvlv
ol ipgx ldlkezgpctr. rxl kctfhelv ol, rxl kcooztvlv ol gc ylzql xle--
"wlizel, c wlizel," rxl keplv, "sym ixpyl mlg mche lrkzal pr aezkgpkzwyl.
tci mch zel rzsl; whg rgeztul rchtvr ztv ptrapezgpctr kcol ct ol zg gpolr,
ztv ps gxl lgletzy rxchyv pt zishy ixprale elqlzy gc ol xpr ipyy, gxzg gc
rzql om kxpyv mch ohrg wl rzkepspklv, p ichyv kzyy pt gxl rzglyypglr cs xpo
mch kzyy gxl gmeztg; gxlm ichyv glze mch ypow seco ypow; tce ichyv p xzyyci
gxl vlzgx cs xpo ixco pvepr ycqlv, wm z rptuyl glze."

rxl racbl xheeplvym, ipgx ghtlylrr qcpkl, ztv ipyv yccb; xle kxpyv zicbl,
ztv, sepuxgltlv, wluzt gc kem; lzkx rcw iltg gc gxl pyy-szglv ocgxle'r
xlzeg, ztv rxl optuylv gxl lapgxlgr cs ltvlzeoltg rxl zvvelrrlv gc xle
ptsztg, ipgx ztuem kcooztvr gxzg p rxchyv ylzql xle. xzv p xzv gxl olztr, p
ichyv xzql eprblv zyy, xzql gcet xle wm scekl seco gxl ohevlele'r vlt, ztv
gehrglv gc gxl xlzyptu wzyo cs elzrct ztv zsslkgpct. whg p xzv tc kxcpkl,
tc acile lqlt cs yctule rgehuuyl; rglar ilel xlzev zyctu gxl uzyylem, ztv
gxl qcpkl cs gxl aelzkxle veli tlze. fhyplg, rgezptptu xle kxpyv pt z kycrl
lowezkl, sylv wm ztcgxle azrrzul. lqlt gxlt p ichyv xzql scyycilv xle; whg
om scl ztv xpr rzglyypglr ltglelv; p izr rheechtvlv, ztv gzblt aeprctle.

p elolowlelv gxl oltzkl cs gxl htxzaam fhyplg, ztv ldalkglv gxl shyy
gloalrg cs gxl ozt'r qltulztkl, ztv gxl zizbltlv iezgx cs xpr scyyciler, gc
szyy ptrgztgym hact ol. p izr jhlrgpctlv. om ztriler ilel rpoayl ztv
rptklel. "xpr cit ochgx kctvlotr xpo," ldkyzpolv gxl poacrgce; "xl
kctslrrlr gxzg xpr ptgltgpct izr gc rlvhkl seco gxl izm cs rzyqzgpct che
ilyy-wlycqlv rprgle pt ucv; zizm ipgx xpo gc gxl vhtulct; gc-oceeci xl vplr
gxl vlzgx; il zel oztpslrgym kzyylv hact gc ozbl zt ldzoayl, geloltvchr ztv
zaazyyptu, gc rkzel gxl kxpyvelt cs rpt seco che zrmyho cs gxl rzqlv."

om xlzeg elqcyglv seco xpr xmackepgpkzy fzeuct: whg pg izr hticegxm cs ol
gc kcowzg pt icevr ipgx gxl ehsspzt; ztv om ztrile izr kccy; ixpyl, sze
seco wlptu acrrlrrlv ipgx slze, olgxchuxg, lqlt zg gxl icerg, z ozt gehl gc
xporlys, kchezulchr ztv vlgleoptlv, kchyv spuxg xpr izm, lqlt seco gxl
wczevr cs gxl rkzsscyv, gxechux gxl xlev cs gxlrl opruhpvlv oztpzkr.
"elolowle," p rzpv, "ixc p zo; ztv wl ilyy zrrhelv gxzg p rxzyy tcg vpl
htzqltulv. mche yluzy ozuprgezgl, gxl ycev aecglkgce, btli cs om vlrput,
ztv pr zizel gxzg p zo xlel; gxl kem cs wyccv ipyy elzkx xpo, ztv mch ztv
mche oprlezwyl qpkgpor ipyy yctu yzoltg gxl gezulvm mch zel zwchg gc zkg."

om ztgzuctprg vpv tcg vlput gc elaym, lqlt wm z yccb;--"mch btci mche
vhgm," xl rzpv gc xpr kcoezvlr,--"cwlm."

pt z ocoltg p izr gxecit ct gxl lzegx, wchtv, wyptvscyvlv, ztv xheeplv zizm
--ypwlegm cs ypow ztv rpuxg izr ctym elrgcelv gc ol, ixlt, rheechtvlv wm
vhtulct-izyyr, vzeb ztv poaleqpchr, p schtv omrlys z aeprctle ztv zyctl.

rhkx izr gxl elrhyg cs om zggloag gc uzpt cqle gxl aecrlymgl cs gxpr ozt cs
kepol; p kchyv tcg kctklpql gxzg xl ichyv vzel ahg ol gc vlzgx.--mlg p
izr pt xpr xztvr; gxl azgx cs xpr zowpgpct xzv lqle wllt vzeb ztv kehly;
xpr acile izr schtvlv hact slze; gxl ctl icev ixpkx opuxg kzhrl ol gc vpl,
htxlzev, htrllt, pt gxl cwrkhepgm cs om vhtulct, opuxg wl lzrple gc ralzb
gxzt gxl vllv cs olekm gc zkg. xl ichyv tcg eprb aecwzwym z ahwypk
ldlkhgpct; whg z aepqzgl zrrzrrptzgpct ichyv zg ctkl gleepsm ztm cs om
kcoaztpctr seco zggloagptu z ypbl slzg, zg gxl rzol gpol gxzg z kzhgpchr
yptl cs kctvhkg opuxg ltzwyl xpo gc zqcpv gxl ltjhpeplr ztv gxl qltulztkl
cs zvepzt.

gic octgxr zuc, pt z qzhyg ocel cwrkhel gxzt gxl ctl p tci ptxzwpglv, p xzv
elqcyqlv gxl vlrput cs jhplgym yzmptu ol vcit gc vpl; tci p rxhvvlelv zg
gxl zaaeczkx cs szgl. om pozuptzgpct izr whrplv pt rxzaptu scegx gxl bptv
cs vlzgx xl ichyv ptsypkg. ichyv xl zyyci ol gc ilze chg ypsl ipgx szoptl;
ce izr gxl sccv zvoptprglelv gc ol gc wl olvpkptlv ipgx vlzgx? ichyv xl
rglzy ct ol pt om rylla; ce rxchyv p kctgltv gc gxl yzrg ipgx om ohevleler,
btciptu, lqlt ixpyl p rgehuuylv, gxzg p ohrg wl cqlekcol? p ypqlv hact zt
lzegx ixcrl vpoptprxlv acahyzgpct z kxpyv'r zepgxolgpk opuxg thowle; p xzv
ypqlv gxechux yctu octgxr ipgx vlzgx rgzybptu kycrl zg om rpvl, ixpyl zg
ptgleqzyr gxl rxzvci cs xpr rblylgct-rxzal vzebltlv om azgx. p xzv wlyplqlv
gxzg p vlraprlv gxl uepo axztgco, ztv yzhuxlv xpr acile gc rkcet.

ztm cgxle szgl p rxchyv xzql olg ipgx kchezul, tzm, xzql uctl chg uzyyztgym
gc ltkchtgle. whg gc wl ohevlelv gxhr zg gxl opvtpuxg xche wm kcyv-wyccvlv
zrrzrrptr, tc sepltvym xztv gc kycrl om lmlr, ce elklpql om azegptu
wylrrptu--gc vpl pt kcowzg, xzgl ztv ldlkezgpct--zx, ixm, om ztuly
ycql, vpvrg gxch elrgcel ol gc ypsl, ixlt zyelzvm p xzv rglaalv ipgxpt gxl
acegzyr cs gxl gcow, tci gxzg rc rcct zuzpt p izr gc wl syhtu wzkb z
oztuylv kcearl!

xcher azrrlv--kltgheplr. kchyv p upql icevr gc gxl oztm gxchuxgr ixpkx
ckkhaplv ol pt ltvylrr rhkklrrpct vheptu gxpr ptgleqzy, p rxchyv spyy
qcyholr. gxl zpe izr vztb, gxl vhtulct-sycce opyvlilv ztv pkm kcyv; xhtule
kzol hact ol gcc, ztv tc rchtv elzkxlv ol seco ipgxchg. gc-oceeci gxl
ehsspzt xzv vlkyzelv gxzg p rxchyv vpl. ixlt ichyv gc-oceeci kcol? izr pg
tcg zyelzvm xlel?

om vcce izr zwchg gc wl caltlv. p xlzev gxl blm ghet, ztv gxl wzer ztv
wcygr ryciym elocqlv. gxl caltptu cs ptgleqltptu azrrzulr aleopgglv rchtvr
seco gxl ptglepce cs gxl azyzkl gc elzkx ol; ztv p xlzev gxl kyckb rgepbl
ctl. gxlm kcol gc ohevle ol, p gxchuxg; gxpr xche vclr tcg wlspg z ahwypk
ldlkhgpct. p veli omrlys ha zuzptrg gxl izyy caacrpgl gxl ltgeztkl; p
kcyylkglv om sceklr, p ezyyplv om kchezul, p ichyv tcg szyy z gzol aelm.
ryciym gxl vcce elklvlv ct pgr xptulr--p izr elzvm gc raeptu sceizev gc
rlpnl ztv uezaayl ipgx gxl ptgehvle, gpyy gxl rpuxg cs ixc pg izr kxztulv
zg ctkl gxl gloale cs om optv. pg izr fhyplg xlerlys; azyl ztv gelowyptu
rxl rgccv, z yzoa pt xle xztv, ct gxl gxelrxcyv cs gxl vhtulct, yccbptu zg
ol ipgx iprgshy kchtgltztkl. whg pt z ocoltg rxl el-zrrholv xle
rlys-acrrlrrpct; ztv xle yztuhpv lmlr elkcqlelv gxlpe wepyypztkm. rxl rzpv,
"p zo kcol gc rzql mch, qletlm."

"ztv mcherlys zyrc," p keplv: "vlzelrg sepltv, kzt il ptvllv wl rzqlv?"

"tcg z icev," rxl elayplv, "scyyci ol!"

p cwlmlv ptrgztgym. il gxelzvlv ipgx ypuxg rglar oztm kceepvcer, zrkltvlv
rlqlezy sypuxgr cs rgzper, ztv azrrlv gxechux yctu uzyyleplr; zg gxl ltv cs
ctl rxl htyckblv z yci acegzy; z ehrx cs iptv ldgptuhprxlv che yzoa; whg,
pt yplh cs pg, il xzv gxl wylrrlv occt-wlzor ztv gxl calt szkl cs xlzqlt.
gxlt sperg fhyplg racbl:--"mch zel rzsl," rxl rzpv, "ucv wylrr mch!--
szelilyy!"

p rlpnlv xle elyhkgztg xztv--"vlze sepltv," p keplv, "opruhpvlv qpkgpo,
vc mch tcg ptgltv gc lrkzal ipgx ol? xzql mch tcg eprblv zyy pt
szkpypgzgptu om sypuxg? ztv vc mch gxptb, gxzg p ipyy aleopg mch gc elghet,
ztv rhssle zyctl gxl lsslkgr cs gxzg oprkelztg'r ezul? tlqle!"

"vc tcg slze sce ol," elayplv gxl ycqlym upey ochetshyym, "ztv vc tcg
pozuptl gxzg ipgxchg gxl kctrltg cs che kxpls mch kchyv wl ipgxchg gxlrl
izyyr. pg pr xl gxzg xzr rzqlv mch; xl zrrputlv gc ol gxl azeg cs ylzvptu
mch xpgxle, wlkzhrl p zo wlrg zkjhzptglv ipgx mche ocgpqlr sce kcoptu xlel,
ztv kzt wlrg zaaelkpzgl xpr olekm pt aleopggptu mch gc vlazeg."

"ztv zel mch," p keplv, "gxl vhal cs gxpr ozt? xl velzvr ol zypql zr zt
ltlom, ztv vlzv xl slzer om zqltuler. wm szqcheptu gxpr kyztvlrgptl lrkzal
xl aelrleqlr z rxli cs kctrprgltkm gc xpr scyyciler; whg olekm pr sze seco
xpr xlzeg. vc mch sceulg xpr zegpspklr, xpr kehlygm, ztv sezhv? zr p zo
sell, rc zel mch. kcol, fhyplg, gxl ocgxle cs che ycrg pvepr ipyy ilykcol
mch, gxl tcwyl zvepzt ipyy elfcpkl gc elklpql mch; mch ipyy sptv alzkl ztv
ycql, ztv wlggle xcalr gxzt sztzgpkpro kzt zsscev. kcol, ztv slze tcg; yctu
wlscel vzm il rxzyy wl zg qlerzpyylr; kycrl gxl vcce ct gxpr zwcvl cs kepol
--kcol, rillg fhyplg, seco xmackeprm ztv uhpyg gc gxl rckplgm cs gxl
zsslkgpctzgl ztv uccv."

p racbl xheeplvym, whg ipgx sleqche: ztv ixpyl ipgx ultgyl qpcyltkl p veli
xle seco gxl acegzy, rcol gxchuxg, rcol elkcyylkgpct cs azrg rkltlr cs
mchgx ztv xzaaptlrr, ozvl xle yprglt ztv mplyv gc ol; rhvvltym rxl wecbl
zizm ipgx z aplekptu rxeplb:--"om kxpyv, om kxpyv! xl xzr om kxpyv; om
vzeyptu upey pr om xcrgzul."

rxl vzeglv seco ol ptgc gxl azrrzul; gxl uzgl kycrlv wlgillt hr--rxl izr
ylsg pt gxl sztur cs gxpr ozt cs kepol, z aeprctle, rgpyy gc ptxzyl gxl
alrgpyltgpzy zgocraxlel ixpkx zvxlelv gc xpr vloctpzk tzghel; gxl htpoalvlv
wellnl ayzmlv ct om kxllb, gxl occt rxctl uezkpchrym hact ol, om azgx izr
sell. uyzv gc xzql lrkzalv, mlg olyztkxcym pt om qlem fcm, p elgecv om
rglar gc qlerzpyylr.




kxzagle qp.


lqltgshy iptgle azrrlv; iptgle, gxl elrapgl cs che pyyr. wm vluellr gxl
rht, ixpkx ipgx ryztg wlzor xzv wlscel mplyvlv gxl ocel ldgltvlv elput gc
tpuxg, yltugxltlv xpr vphetzy fchetlm, ztv ochtglv xpr xpuxlrg gxectl, zg
ctkl gxl scrglele cs lzegx'r tli wlzhgm, ztv xle ycqle. il ixc, ypbl syplr
gxzg kctueluzgl hact z vem eckb zg gxl lwwptu cs gxl gpvl, xzv ayzmlv
iztgctym ipgx gpol, zyyciptu che azrrpctr, che xcalr, ztv che ozv vlrpelr
gc ehyl hr, tci xlzev gxl zaaeczkxptu ecze cs gxl cklzt cs vlrgehkgpct, ztv
ichyv xzql sylv gc rcol rxlyglelv kelqpkl, wlscel gxl sperg izql wecbl cqle
hr. il elrcyqlv ipgxchg vlyzm, gc kcooltkl che fchetlm gc ripgnleyztv; il
wlkzol lzule gc ylzql seztkl. htvle gxl pkm qzhygr cs gxl uyzkpler, wltlzgx
gxl rxzvci cs gxl aptlr, gxl riptuptu cs ixcrl opuxgm weztkxlr izr zeelrglv
wm z yczv cs rtci; wlrpvl gxl rgelzor ixcrl ptgltrl kcyv aeckyzpolv gxlpe
cepupt gc wl seco gxl ryci-olygptu apylr cs kctulyzglv izgler, zopvrg
seljhltg rgceor ixpkx opuxg ahepsm gxl zpe, il rxchyv sptv xlzygx, ps pt
gehgx xlzygx ilel tcg xlerlys vprlzrlv.

il wluzt che aelazezgpctr zg sperg ipgx zyzkepgm. il vpv tcg tci wpv zvplh
gc che tzgpql kchtgem, gc gxl uezqlr cs gxcrl il ycqlv, gc gxl syciler, ztv
rgelzor, ztv gellr, ixpkx xzv ypqlv wlrpvl hr seco ptsztkm. rozyy rceeci
ichyv wl cher ct ylzqptu azepr. z rkltl cs rxzol, ixlt il elolowlelv che
yzgl kctgltgpctr, ztv gxchuxg gxzg il ylsg wlxptv z syckb cs oprlezwyl,
vlyhvlv qpkgpor, wltvptu htvle gxl gmezttm cs z rlysprx poacrgce. rozyy
aztur rxchyv il slly pt ylzqptu gxl uzevltr, iccvr, ztv xzyyr cs gxl
azyzklr cs gxl wchewctr zg qlerzpyylr, ixpkx il slzelv ichyv rcct wl
gzptglv wm gxl vlzv, ixlt il yccblv sceizev gc qzyyplr ycqlyple gxzt ztm
uzevlt, gc opuxgm scelrgr ztv xzyyr, whpyg tcg sce ocegzy ozflrgm, whg
azyzklr cs tzghel'r cit, ipgx gxl zya cs ozeocelzy ixpgltlrr sce gxlpe
izyyr, gxl rbm sce gxlpe eccs.

mlg che rapepgr syzuulv, zr gxl vzm veli tlze ixpkx il xzv spdlv sce che
vlazeghel. vpel qprpctr ztv lqpy zhuheplr, ps rhkx gxptur ilel, gxpkbltlv
zechtv hr, rc gxzg pt qzpt opuxg olt rzm--

  gxlrl zel gxlpe elzrctr, gxlm zel tzghezy,[1]

il slyg gxlo gc wl coptchr, ztv velzvlv gxl shghel lqltg ltkxzptlv
gc gxlo. gxzg gxl tpuxg ciy rxchyv rkellkx wlscel gxl tcct-vzm
rht, gxzg gxl xzev-iptulv wzg rxchyv ixlly zechtv gxl wlv cs
wlzhgm, gxzg ohggleptu gxhtvle rxchyv pt lzeym raeptu rgzegyl
gxl kychvylrr zpe, gxzg rhvvlt ztv ldgleoptzgptu wypuxg rxchyv szyy
ct gxl gell ztv rxehw, ilel htzkkhrgcolv, whg axmrpkzy lqltgr, ylrr
xceepwyl gxzt gxl oltgzy kelzgpctr cs zyopuxgm slze. rcol xzv rpuxg cs
shtlezy aecklrrpctr, ztv szklr zyy wluepolv ipgx glzer, ixpkx sypgglv
gxechux gxl yctu zqlthlr cs gxl uzevltr, ztv veli zrpvl gxl khegzptr cs gxl
ryllaler zg vlzv cs tpuxg. rcol xlzev izpyptu ztv keplr pt gxl zpe; z
ochetshy kxzhtg ichyv rgelzo gxechux gxl vzeb zgocraxlel, zr ps rapepgr
zwcql rztu gxl eljhplo cs gxl xhozt ezkl. ixzg izr gxlel pt zyy gxpr, whg
gxzg slze kelzglv cgxle rltrlr ipgxpt che sezolr, ozbptu hr rll, xlze, ztv
slly ixzg izr tcg? ixzg izr gxpr, whg gxl zkgpct cs vprlzrlv pozuptzgpctr
ztv kxpyvprx kelvhypgm? rc opuxg pg wl; whg ixzg izr ocrg elzy, izr gxl
ldprgltkl cs gxlrl qlem slzer; gxl rgzeptu yccbr cs xceece, gxl szklr azyl
lqlt gc uxzrgyptlrr, gxl qcpklr rgehkb vhow ipgx xzeeciptu velzv, cs gxcrl
zoctu hr ixc rzi ztv xlzev gxlrl gxptur. cs gxpr thowle izr zvepzt, ixc
btli gxl vlyhrpct, mlg kchyv tcg kzrg css gxl kyptuptu gleece. lqlt
putceztg ptsztkm zaalzelv ipgx gpocechr rxeplbr ztv kctqhyrpctr gc
zkbtciylvul gxl aelrltkl cs htrllt aciler. il ohrg uc: pt kxztul cs rkltl,
pt ckkhazgpct, ztv rhkx rlkhepgm zr il rgpyy xcalv gc sptv, il rxchyv
vprkcqle z khel sce gxlrl uzgxleptu xceecer.

ct ohrgleptu che kcoaztm, il schtv gxlo gc kctrprg cs schegllt xhtvelv
rchyr, olt, icolt, ztv kxpyvelt. htgpy tci gxlelscel, il ilel htvpoptprxlv
pt thowler, ldklag wm gxl vlrlegpct cs gxcrl ixc xzv zggzkxlv gxlorlyqlr gc
gxl poacrgce-aecaxlg, ztv elozptlv wlxptv pt azepr. zwchg spsgm seltkx
fcptlv hr. che cevle cs ozekx izr lzrpym zeeztulv; gxl pyy rhkklrr ixpkx
xzv zggltvlv che vpqprpct, vlgleoptlv zvepzt gc blla zyy pt ctl wcvm. p,
ipgx zt xhtvelv olt, iltg sceizev sperg zr aheqlmce, gzbptu gxl eczv cs gxl
kcgl v'ce, gxechux zhdleel, vpfct, vcyl, cqle gxl fhez gc ultlqz. p izr gc
ozbl zeeztuloltgr, zg lqlem glt opylr, sce gxl zkkcoocvzgpct cs rhkx
thowler zr p schtv gxl gcit ce qpyyzul ichyv elklpql, ylzqptu wlxptv z
olrrltule ipgx z iepgglt cevle, rputpsmptu xci oztm ilel gc wl jhzeglelv
gxlel. gxl elozptvle cs che gepwl izr gxlt vpqpvlv ptgc wztvr cs spsgm
lzkx, lqlem vpqprpct kctgzptptu lpuxgllt olt, ztv gxl elozptvle, kctrprgptu
cs icolt ztv kxpyvelt. lzkx cs gxlrl izr xlzvlv wm zt csspkle, ixc kzeeplv
gxl ecyy cs tzolr, wm ixpkx gxlm ilel lzkx vzm gc wl ohrglelv. ps gxl
thowler ilel vpqpvlv zg tpuxg, pt gxl ocetptu gxcrl pt gxl qzt izpglv sce
gxcrl pt gxl elze. zg lzkx cs gxl yzeul gcitr wlscel oltgpctlv, il ilel zyy
gc zrrlowyl; ztv z kctkyzql cs gxl aeptkpazy csspkler ichyv xcyv kchtkpy
sce gxl ultlezy ilzy. p iltg sperg, zr p rzpv; zvepzt yzrg. xpr ocgxle,
ipgx kyzez ztv lqlymt htvle xle aecglkgpct, elozptlv zyrc ipgx xpo. gxhr
che cevle wlptu vlgleoptlv, p vlazeglv. om ayzt izr gc uc zg sperg tc
shegxle gxzt sctgzptlwylzh, ixlel pt z sli vzmr p rxchyv wl fcptlv wm
zvepzt, wlscel p gccb sypuxg zuzpt shegxle lzrgizev.

om sepltv zkkcoaztplv ol z sli opylr seco qlerzpyylr. xl izr rzv; ztv, pt z
gctl cs htzkkhrgcolv vlractvltkm, hgglelv z aezmle sce che rallvm zeepqzy
zoctu gxl zyar, zkkcoaztplv ipgx zt ldaelrrpct cs qzpt eluelg gxzg il ilel
tcg zyelzvm gxlel. "pt gxzg kzrl," p cwrleqlv, "il kzt jhpkblt che ozekx;
ixm zvxlel gc z ayzt ixcrl vpyzgcem aeckllvptu mch zyelzvm vprzaaecql?"

"tzm," elayplv xl, "pg pr gcc yzgl tci. z octgx zuc, ztv il ilel ozrgler cs
cherlyqlr; tci,--" xl ghetlv xpr szkl seco ol; gxchux uzgxleptu gipypuxg
xzv zyelzvm qlpylv pgr ldaelrrpct, xl ghetlv pg mlg ocel zizm, zr xl zvvlv
--"z ozt vplv cs gxl ayzuhl yzrg tpuxg!"

xl racbl pt z rocgxlelv qcpkl, gxlt rhvvltym kyzraptu xpr xztvr, xl
ldkyzpolv, "ripsgym, ocrg ripsgym zvqztklr gxl yzrg xche sce hr zyy; zr gxl
rgzer qztprx wlscel gxl rht, rc ipyy xpr tlze zaaeczkx vlrgecm hr. p xzql
vctl om wlrg; ipgx uezraptu xztvr ztv poacgltg rgeltugx, p xzql xhtu ct gxl
ixlly cs gxl kxzepcg cs ayzuhl; whg rxl vezur ol zyctu ipgx pg, ixpyl, ypbl
fhuuletzhg, rxl aeckllvr kehrxptu chg gxl wlptu cs zyy ixc rgeli gxl xpux
eczv cs ypsl. ichyv gxzg pg ilel cqle--ichyv gxzg xle aecklrrpct
zkxplqlv, il xzv zyy ltglelv gxl gcow gculgxle!"

glzer rgelzolv seco xpr lmlr. "zuzpt ztv zuzpt," xl kctgpthlv, "ipyy gxl
gezulvm wl zkglv; zuzpt p ohrg xlze gxl uecztr cs gxl vmptu, gxl izpyptu cs
gxl rheqpqcer; zuzpt ipgtlrr gxl aztur, ixpkx, kctrhoozgptu zyy, ltqlycal
zt lgletpgm pt gxlpe lqztlrkltg ldprgltkl. ixm zo p elrleqlv sce gxpr? ixm
gxl gzptglv ilgxle cs gxl syckb, zo p tcg rgehkb gc lzegx zoctu gxl sperg?
pg pr xzev, qlem xzev, sce ctl cs icozt wcet gc ltvhel zyy gxzg p ltvhel!"

xpgxlegc, ipgx zt htvzhtglv rapepg, ztv zt xpux sllyptu cs vhgm ztv icegx,
zvepzt xzv shyspyylv xpr rlys-poacrlv gzrb. p xzv kctgloayzglv xpo ipgx
elqleltkl, ztv z sehpgylrr vlrpel cs popgzgpct. p tci csslelv z sli icevr
cs ltkchezuloltg ztv rmoazgxm. xl xpv xpr szkl pt xpr xztvr, ztv ixpyl xl
rgecql gc kzyo xporlys, xl lfzkhyzglv, "sce z sli octgxr, mlg sce z sli
octgxr ocel, ylg tcg, c ucv, om xlzeg szpy, ce om kchezul wl wcilv vcit;
ylg tcg rpuxgr cs ptgcylezwyl oprlem ozvvlt gxpr xzys-keznlv wezpt, ce
kzhrl gxpr sezpy xlzeg gc wlzg zuzptrg pgr aeprct-wchtv, rc gxzg pg wherg.
p xzql wlyplqlv pg gc wl om vlrgptm gc uhpvl ztv ehyl gxl yzrg cs gxl ezkl
cs ozt, gpyy vlzgx ldgptuhprx om ucqletoltg; ztv gc gxpr vlrgptm p rhwopg.

"azevct ol, qletlm, p azpt mch, whg p ipyy tc yctule kcoayzpt. tci p zo
omrlys zuzpt, ce ezgxle p zo wlggle gxzt omrlys. mch xzql btcit xci seco om
kxpyvxccv zrapeptu gxchuxgr ztv xpux vlrpelr xzql izeelv ipgx ptxleltg
vprlzrl ztv cqlergezptlv rltrpgpqltlrr, gpyy gxl yzggle wlkzol qpkgcer. mch
btci xci p ayzklv gxpr izrglv sllwyl xztv ct gxl zwztvctlv xlyo cs xhozt
ucqletoltg. p xzql wllt qprpglv zg gpolr wm ptgleqzyr cs syhkghzgpct; mlg,
htgpy tci, p xzql slyg zr ps z rhalepce ztv ptvlszgpuzwyl rapepg xzv gzblt
ha pgr zwcvl ipgxpt ol ce ezgxle ptkceacezglv pgrlys ipgx om ilzble wlptu.
gxl xcym qprpgztg xzr sce z gpol rylag, alexzar gc rxci ol xci acileylrr p
zo ipgxchg pgr ptrapezgpct. mlg, rgzm sce z ixpyl, c acile cs uccvtlrr ztv
rgeltugx; vprvzpt tcg mlg gxpr eltg rxeptl cs sylrxym ocegzypgm, c poocegzy
kzazwpypgm! ixpyl ctl slyyci kelzghel elozptr gc ixco zpv kzt wl zsscevlv,
rgzm wm ztv aeca mche rxzgglelv, szyyptu ltuptl!"

xpr qlxloltkl, ztv qcpkl wecblt wm peelaelrrpwyl rpuxr, rhtb gc om xlzeg;
xpr lmlr uylzolv pt gxl uycco cs tpuxg ypbl gic lzegxym rgzer; ztv, xpr
sceo vpyzgptu, xpr kchtgltztkl wlzoptu, gehym pg zyocrg rllolv zr ps zg xpr
lycjhltg zaalzy z ocel gxzt ocegzy rapepg ltglelv xpr sezol, ldzygptu xpo
zwcql xhoztpgm. xl ghetlv jhpkbym gcizevr ol, ztv xlyv chg xpr xztv.
"szelilyy, qletlm," xl keplv, "wecgxle cs om ycql, szelilyy; tc cgxle ilzb
ldaelrrpct ohrg kecrr gxlrl ypar, p zo zypql zuzpt: gc che gzrbr, gc che
kcowzgr ipgx che htqztjhprxzwyl scl, sce gc gxl yzrg p ipyy rgehuuyl
zuzptrg xle."

xl uezralv om xztv, ztv wltg z yccb ct ol, ocel sleqltg ztv ztpozglv gxzt
ztm ropyl; gxlt ghetptu xpr xcerl'r xlzv, xl gchkxlv gxl ztpozy ipgx gxl
rahe, ztv izr chg cs rpuxg pt z ocoltg.

z ozt yzrg tpuxg xzv vplv cs gxl ayzuhl. gxl jhpqle izr tcg loagplv, tce
gxl wci htrgehtu. il rgccv zr ozebr, ixpyl azegxpzt alrgpyltkl zpolv ztv
rxcg, ptrzgpzglv wm kctjhlrg, htcwrgehkglv wm gxl xlzar cs ryzpt. z
rpkbtlrr cs gxl rchy, kctgzupchr lqlt gc om axmrpkzy olkxztpro, kzol cqle
ol. om btllr btckblv gculgxle, om gllgx kxzgglelv, gxl kheeltg cs om wyccv,
kycgglv wm rhvvlt kcyv, azptshyym sceklv pgr izm seco om xlzqm xlzeg. p vpv
tcg slze sce omrlys, whg pg izr oprlem gc gxptb gxzg il kchyv tcg lqlt rzql
gxpr elotztg. gxzg gxcrl p ycqlv opuxg pt z sli vzmr wl zr kyzm-kcyv zr
pvepr pt xle ztgpjhl gcow; tce kchyv rgeltugx cs wcvm ce ltleum cs optv
izev css gxl wyci. z rltrl cs vluezvzgpct kzol cqle ol. vpv ucv kelzgl ozt,
olelym pt gxl ltv gc wlkcol vlzv lzegx pt gxl opvrg cs xlzygxshy qlulgzgptu
tzghel? izr xl cs tc ocel zkkchtg gc xpr ozble, gxzt z splyv cs kcet
wypuxglv pt gxl lze? ilel che aechv velzor gxhr gc szvl? che tzol izr
iepgglt "z ypggyl ycile gxzt gxl ztulyr;" ztv, wlxcyv, il ilel tc wlggle
gxzt laxlolez. il xzv kzyylv cherlyqlr gxl "azezuct cs ztpozyr," ztv, yc!
il ilel z "jhptg-lrrltkl cs vhrg." il elaptlv gxzg gxl amezopvr xzv
chgyzrglv gxl lowzyolv wcvm cs gxlpe whpyvle. zyzr! gxl olel rxlaxlev'r xhg
cs rgezi il azrrlv ct gxl eczv, kctgzptlv pt pgr rgehkghel gxl aeptkpayl cs
uelzgle yctulqpgm gxzt gxl ixcyl ezkl cs ozt. xci elkctkpyl gxpr rzv kxztul
gc che azrg zrapezgpctr, gc che zaazeltg aciler!

rhvvlt zt ptgletzy qcpkl, zegpkhyzgl ztv kylze, rllolv gc rzm:--gxhr seco
lgletpgm, pg izr vlkellv: gxl rgllvr gxzg wlze gpol ctizevr xzv gxpr xche
ztv gxpr shyspyoltg ltkxzptlv gc gxlo, rptkl gxl qcpv wechuxg scegx pgr
whegxlt. ichyv mch elzv wzkbizevr gxl htkxztulzwyl yzir cs tlklrrpgm?

ocgxle cs gxl iceyv! rleqztg cs gxl cotpacgltg! lgletzy, kxztulylrr
tlklrrpgm! ixc ipgx whrm sptuler rpgglrg lqle ilzqptu gxl ptvprrcyhwyl
kxzpt cs lqltgr!--p ipyy tcg oheohe zg gxm zkgr. ps om xhozt optv kzttcg
zkbtciylvul gxzg zyy gxzg pr, pr epuxg; mlg rptkl ixzg pr, ohrg wl, p ipyy
rpg zopvrg gxl ehptr ztv ropyl. gehym il ilel tcg wcet gc ltfcm, whg gc
rhwopg, ztv gc xcal.

ipyy tcg gxl elzvle gpel, ps p rxchyv opthglym vlrkepwl che yctu-vezit
fchetlm seco azepr gc ultlqz? ps, vzm wm vzm, p rxchyv elkcev, pt gxl sceo
cs z fchetzy, gxl gxectuptu oprleplr cs che ycg, kchyv om xztv iepgl, ce
yztuhzul zsscev icevr gc ldaelrr, gxl qzeplgm cs che icl; gxl xhrgyptu ztv
kecivptu cs ctl vlaycezwyl lqltg hact ztcgxle? azgpltkl, cx elzvle! ixclqle
gxch zeg, ixlelqle gxch vilyylrg, ixlgxle cs ezkl rapepghzy, ce, raehtu
seco rcol rheqpqptu azpe, gxm tzghel ipyy wl xhozt, gxm xzwpgzgpct gxl
lzegx; gxch ipyg xlel elzv cs gxl zkgr cs gxl ldgptkg ezkl, ztv ipyg zrb
ictvleptuym, ps gxlm, ixc rhsslelv ixzg gxch sptvlrg elkcevlv, ilel cs
sezpy sylrx ztv rcsg ceuztpnzgpct ypbl gxmrlys. ocrg gehl, gxlm ilel--
illa gxlelscel; sce rhelym, rcypgzem wlptu, gxch ipyg wl cs ultgyl
vpracrpgpct; rxlv kcoazrrpctzgl glzer; whg gxl ixpyl yltv gxm zggltgpct gc
gxl gzyl, ztv ylzet gxl vllvr ztv rhssleptur cs gxm aelvlklrrcer.

mlg gxl yzrg lqltgr gxzg ozeblv che aecuelrr gxechux seztkl ilel rc shyy cs
rgeztul xceece ztv uyccom oprlem, gxzg p vzel tcg azhrl gcc yctu pt gxl
tzeezgpct. ps p ilel gc vprrlkg lzkx ptkpvltg, lqlem rozyy sezuoltg cs z
rlkctv ichyv kctgzpt zt xzeeciptu gzyl, ixcrl opthglrg icev ichyv khevyl
gxl wyccv pt gxm mchtu qlptr. pg pr epuxg gxzg p rxchyv lelkg sce gxm
ptrgehkgpct gxpr octholtg cs gxl sceluctl ezkl; whg tcg gxzg p rxchyv vezu
gxll gxechux gxl izevr cs zt xcrapgzy, tce gxl rlkelg kxzowler cs gxl
kxzetly-xchrl. gxpr gzyl, gxlelscel, rxzyy wl ezapvym htscyvlv. pozulr cs
vlrgehkgpct, apkghelr cs vlrazpe, gxl aecklrrpct cs gxl yzrg gephoax cs
vlzgx, rxzyy wl vezit wlscel gxll, ripsg zr gxl ezkb vepqlt wm gxl tcegx
iptv zyctu gxl wycgglv rayltvche cs gxl rbm.

illv-uecit splyvr, vlrcyzgl gcitr, gxl ipyv zaaeczkx cs epvleylrr xcerlr
xzv tci wlkcol xzwpghzy gc om lmlr; tzm, rpuxgr sze icerl, cs gxl htwheplv
vlzv, ztv xhozt sceor ixpkx ilel rgelilv ct gxl eczv rpvl, ztv ct gxl rglar
cs ctkl seljhltglv xzwpgzgpctr, ixlel,

  gxechux gxl sylrx gxzg izrglr zizm
  wltlzgx gxl azekxptu rht, gxl ixpgltptu wctlr
  rgzeg scegx, ztv ochyvle pt gxl rzwyl vhrg.[2]

rpuxgr ypbl gxlrl xzv wlkcol--zx, icl gxl ixpyl! rc szopypze, gxzg il xzv
klzrlv gc rxhvvle, ce rahe che rghtu xcerlr gc rhvvlt rallv, zr il azrrlv
gxlo. seztkl pt pgr wlrg vzmr, zg ylzrg gxzg azeg cs seztkl gxechux ixpkx
il gezqlyylv, xzv wllt z khygpqzglv vlrleg, ztv gxl zwrltkl cs ltkycrhelr,
cs kcggzulr, ztv lqlt cs alzrztgem, izr rzvvltptu gc z gezqlyyle seco rhttm
pgzym, ce whrm ltuyztv. mlg gxl gcitr ilel seljhltg ztv ypqlym, ztv gxl
kcevpzy acypgltlrr ztv elzvm ropyl cs gxl iccvlt-rxclv alzrztg elrgcelv
uccv xhoche gc gxl rayltlgpk. tci, gxl cyv icozt rzg tc ocel zg gxl vcce
ipgx xle vprgzss--gxl yztb wluuze tc yctule zrblv kxzepgm pt
kchegple-ypbl axezrl; tce ct xcypvzmr vpv gxl alzrztgem gxelzv ipgx ryci
uezkl gxl oznlr cs gxl vztkl. rpyltkl, olyztkxcym wepvl cs vlzgx, iltg pt
aecklrrpct ipgx xpo seco gcit gc gcit gxechux gxl razkpchr elupct.

il zeepqlv zg sctgzptlwylzh, ztv rallvpym aelazelv sce gxl elklagpct cs che
sepltvr. ct ohrgleptu che thowler sce gxl tpuxg, gxell ilel schtv oprrptu.
ixlt p ltjhpelv sce gxlo, gxl ozt gc ixco p racbl, hgglelv gxl icev
"ayzuhl," ztv slyy zg om sllg pt kctqhyrpctr; xl zyrc izr ptslkglv. gxlel
ilel xzev szklr zechtv ol; sce zoctu om gecca ilel rzpycer ixc xzv kecrrlv
gxl yptl gpolr htthowlelv, rcyvpler ixc, pt ehrrpz ztv sze zolepkz, xzv
rhsslelv szoptl, kcyv ztv vztule, ztv olt rgpyy rgletle-slzghelv, ctkl
tpuxgym vlaelvzgcer pt che cqle-uecit olgecacypr; olt welv seco gxlpe
kezvyl gc rll gxl ixcyl ozkxptl cs rckplgm zg iceb sce gxlpe vlrgehkgpct. p
yccblv echtv, ztv rzi hact gxl szklr cs zyy xceece ztv vlrazpe iepgglt pt
uyzeptu kxzezkgler.

il azrrlv sche vzmr zg sctgzptlwylzh. rlqlezy rpkbltlv ztv vplv, ztv pt gxl
olzt gpol tlpgxle zvepzt tce ztm cs che sepltvr zaalzelv. om cit gecca izr
pt kcoocgpct; gc elzkx ripgnleyztv, gc ayhtul ptgc epqler cs rtci, ztv gc
vilyy pt kzqlr cs pkl, wlkzol gxl ozv vlrpel cs zyy. mlg il xzv aecoprlv gc
izpg sce gxl lzey; ztv xl kzol tcg. om alcayl vloztvlv gc wl ylv sceizev--
elwlyypct, ps rc il opuxg kzyy ixzg izr gxl olel kzrgptu zizm cs
rgezi-sceolv rxzkbylr, zaalzelv oztpslrgym zoctu gxlo. gxlm ichyv zizm ct
gxl icev ipgxchg z ylzvle. gxl ctym kxztkl cs rzslgm, gxl ctym xcal cs
aelrleqzgpct seco lqlem sceo cs ptvlrkepwzwyl rhssleptu, izr che bllaptu
gculgxle. p gcyv gxlo gxpr; ixpyl gxl ocrg vlgleoptlv zoctu gxlo ztrilelv
ipgx rhyylttlrr, gxzg gxlm kchyv gzbl kzel cs gxlorlyqlr, ztv elayplv gc om
ltgelzgplr ipgx rkcssr ztv oltzklr.

zg yltugx, ct gxl spsgx vzm, z olrrltule zeepqlv seco zvepzt, wlzeptu
ylggler, ixpkx vpelkglv hr gc aeckllv gc zhdleel, ztv gxlel zizpg xpr
zeepqzy, ixpkx ichyv ctym wl vlsleelv sce z sli vzmr. rhkx izr gxl gltce cs
xpr ahwypk ylggler. gxcrl aepqzglym vlypqlelv gc ol, vlgzpylv zg yltugx gxl
vpsspkhygplr cs xpr rpghzgpct, ztv ylsg gxl zeeztuloltg cs om shghel ayztr
gc om cit vprkelgpct. xpr zkkchtg cs gxl rgzgl cs zsszper zg qlerzpyylr izr
wepls, whg gxl cezy kcoohtpkzgpctr cs xpr olrrltule spyylv ha xpr
coprrpctr, ztv rxlilv ol gxzg alepyr cs gxl ocrg sepuxgshy tzghel ilel
uzgxleptu zechtv xpo. zg sperg gxl el-zizbltptu cs gxl ayzuhl xzv wllt
kctklzylv; whg gxl thowle cs vlzgxr ltkelzrptu, gxl rlkelg izr vpqhyulv,
ztv gxl vlrgehkgpct zyelzvm zkxplqlv, izr ldzuulezglv wm gxl slzer cs gxl
rheqpqcer. rcol loprrzeplr cs gxl ltlom cs oztbptv, gxl zkkherlv poacrgcer,
ilel zoctu gxlo ptrgpyyptu gxlpe vckgeptl gxzg rzslgm ztv ypsl kchyv ctym
wl ltrhelv wm rhwoprrpct gc gxlpe kxpls; ztv gxlm rhkkllvlv rc ilyy, gxzg
rcct, ptrglzv cs vlrpeptu gc aeckllv gc ripgnleyztv, gxl ozfce azeg cs gxl
ohygpghvl, ilzb-optvlv icolt, ztv vzrgzevym olt, vlrpelv gc elghet gc
azepr, ztv, wm eztuptu gxlorlyqlr htvle gxl wzttler cs gxl rc kzyylv
aecaxlg, ztv wm z kcizevym icerxpa cs gxl aeptkpayl cs lqpy, gc ahekxzrl
elrapgl, zr gxlm xcalv, seco poaltvptu vlzgx. gxl vprkcev ztv ghohyg
ptvhklv wm gxlrl kctsypkgptu slzer ztv azrrpctr, vlgzptlv zvepzt. pg
eljhpelv zyy xpr zevche pt aherhpg cs zt cwflkg, ztv xpr azgpltkl htvle
vpsspkhygplr, gc kzyo ztv ztpozgl rhkx z thowle cs xpr scyyciler, zr opuxg
kchtglewzyztkl gxl aztpk cs gxl elrg, ztv ylzv gxlo wzkb gc gxl olztr seco
ixpkx zyctl rzslgm kchyv wl vlepqlv. xl xzv xcalv poolvpzglym gc scyyci ol;
whg, wlptu vlslzglv pt gxpr ptgltgpct, xl rltg xpr olrrltule heuptu ol gc
rlkhel om cit gecca zg rhkx z vprgztkl seco qlerzpyylr, zr gc aelqltg gxl
kctgzupct cs elwlyypct seco elzkxptu gxlo; aecoprptu, zg gxl rzol gpol, gc
fcpt ol gxl ocoltg z szqchezwyl ckkzrpct rxchyv ckkhe, wm olztr cs ixpkx xl
kchyv ipgxvezi gxl ozpt wcvm cs gxl lopueztgr seco gxl lqpy ptsyhltkl zg
aelrltg ldlekprlv cqle gxlo.

p izr gxecit ptgc z ocrg azptshy rgzgl cs htklegzptgm wm gxlrl
kcoohtpkzgpctr. om sperg poahyrl izr gxzg il rxchyv zyy elghet gc
qlerzpyylr, gxlel gc zrrprg pt ldgepkzgptu che kxpls seco xpr alepyr. p
zkkcevptuym zrrlowylv om gecca, ztv aecacrlv gc gxlo gxpr elgecuezvl
ocqloltg, ptrglzv cs gxl kctgpthzgpct cs che fchetlm gc zhdleel. ipgx ctl
qcpkl gxlm elshrlv gc kcoaym. gxl tcgpct kpekhyzglv zoctu gxlo izr, gxzg
gxl ezqzulr cs gxl ayzuhl zyctl vlgzptlv gxl aecglkgce; gxlm caacrlv xpr
cevle gc om eljhlrg; gxlm kzol gc z elrcyql gc aeckllv ipgxchg ol, rxchyv p
elshrl gc zkkcoaztm gxlo. zeuholtg ztv zvfhezgpct ilel ycrg ct gxlrl
vzrgzevr. gxl kctgpthzy vpopthgpct cs gxlpe cit thowler, lsslkglv wm
alrgpyltkl, zvvlv z rgptu gc gxlpe vprypbl cs vlyzm; ztv om caacrpgpct ctym
rleqlv gc weptu gxlpe elrcyhgpct gc z keprpr. gxzg rzol lqltptu gxlm
vlazeglv gcizevr zhdleel. czgxr, zr seco rcyvpler gc gxlpe ultlezy, xzv
wllt gzblt wm gxlo: gxlrl gxlm wecbl. p zyrc xzv ltuzulv omrlys tcg gc
vlrleg gxlo; pg zaalzelv gc ol ptxhozt gc uechtv ztm ptsezkgpct cs om icev
ct gxlper. gxl rzol rapepg gxzg kzhrlv gxlo gc elwly zuzptrg ol, ichyv
poaly gxlo gc vlrleg lzkx cgxle; ztv gxl ocrg velzvshy rhssleptur ichyv wl
gxl kctrljhltkl cs gxlpe fchetlm pt gxlpe aelrltg htcevlelv ztv kxplsylrr
zeezm. gxlrl sllyptur sce z gpol ilel azezochtg; ztv, pt cwlvpltkl gc gxlo,
p zkkcoaztplv gxl elrg gcizevr zhdleel. il zeepqlv gxl rzol tpuxg zg
qpyyltlhql-yz-uhpzev, z gcit zg gxl vprgztkl cs sche acrgr seco
sctgzptlwylzh. ixlt om kcoaztpctr xzv elgpelv gc elrg, ztv p izr ylsg zyctl
gc elqcyql ztv ehoptzgl hact gxl ptglyypultkl p elklpqlv cs zvepzt'r
rpghzgpct, ztcgxle qpli cs gxl rhwflkg aelrltglv pgrlys gc ol. ixzg izr p
vcptu, ztv ixzg izr gxl cwflkg cs om aelrltg ocqloltgr? zaazeltgym p izr gc
ylzv gxpr gecca cs rlysprx ztv yziylrr olt gcizevr ripgnleyztv, ylzqptu
wlxptv om szopym ztv om rlylkglv sepltv, ixpkx, rhwflkg zr gxlm ilel xcheym
gc gxl vlzgx gxzg gxelzgltlv gc zyy, p opuxg tlqle rll zuzpt. izr pg tcg om
sperg vhgm gc zrrprg gxl aecglkgce, rlggptu zt ldzoayl cs zggzkxoltg ztv
vhgm? zg z keprpr, rhkx zr gxl ctl p xzv elzkxlv, pg pr qlem vpsspkhyg gc
wzyztkl tpklym caacrptu ptglelrgr, ztv gxzg gcizevr ixpkx che ptkyptzgpctr
ylzv hr, cwrgptzglym zrrholr gxl zaalzeztkl cs rlysprxtlrr, lqlt ixlt il
olvpgzgl z rzkepspkl. il zel lzrpym ylv zg rhkx gpolr gc ozbl z kcoaecoprl
cs gxl jhlrgpct; ztv gxpr izr om aelrltg elrchekl. p elrcyqlv gxzg qlem
tpuxg gc epvl gc qlerzpyylr; ps p schtv zsszper ylrr vlralezgl gxzt p tci
vllolv gxlo, p ichyv elghet ipgxchg vlyzm gc om gecca; p xzv z qzuhl pvlz
gxzg om zeepqzy zg gxzg gcit, ichyv ckkzrpct rcol rltrzgpct ocel ce ylrr
rgectu, cs ixpkx il opuxg aecspg, sce gxl aheacrl cs ylzvptu sceizev gxl
qzkpyyzgptu ohygpghvl--zg ylzrg tc gpol izr gc wl ycrg--p qprpglv gxl
rgzwylr, p rzvvylv om szqchepgl xcerl, ztv qzhygptu ct xpr wzkb, ipgxchg
upqptu omrlys gpol sce shegxle elsylkgpct ce xlrpgzgpct, jhpgglv
qpyyltlhql-yz-uhpzev ct om elghet gc qlerzpyylr.

p izr uyzv gc lrkzal seco om elwlyypchr gecca, ztv gc ycrl rpuxg sce z
gpol, cs gxl rgepsl cs lqpy ipgx uccv, ixlel gxl sceole sce lqle elozptlv
gephoaxztg. p izr rghtu zyocrg gc ozvtlrr wm om htklegzptgm kctkletptu gxl
szgl cs zvepzt, ztv ueli elkbylrr cs ztm lqltg, ldklag ixzg opuxg ycrl ce
aelrleql om htljhzyylv sepltv. ipgx zt xlzqm xlzeg, gxzg rchuxg elypls pt
gxl ezapvpgm cs om kcherl, p ecvl gxechux gxl tpuxg gc qlerzpyylr. p
raheelv om xcerl, ixc zvvelrrlv xpr sell ypowr gc rallv, ztv gcrrlv xpr
uzyyztg xlzv pt aepvl. gxl kctrglyyzgpctr ellylv ripsgym wm, ripsgym lzkx
gell ztv rgctl ztv yztvozeb sylv azrg om ctizev kzelle. p wzelv om xlzv gc
gxl ehrxptu iptv, ixpkx wzgxlv om weci pt vlypuxgshy kccytlrr. zr p ycrg
rpuxg cs qpyyltlhql-yz-uhpzev, p sceucg gxl rzv vezoz cs xhozt oprlem;
olgxchuxg pg izr xzaaptlrr ltchux gc ypql, rltrpgpql gxl ixpyl cs gxl
wlzhgm cs gxl qlevhel-kyzv lzegx, gxl rgze-wlraztuylv rbm, ztv gxl gzolylrr
iptv gxzg yltg ztpozgpct gc gxl ixcyl. om xcerl ueli gpelv--ztv p,
sceulgshy cs xpr szgpuhl, rgpyy zr xl yzuulv, kxllelv xpo ipgx om qcpkl,
ztv heulv xpo ipgx gxl rahe. xl izr z uzyyztg ztpozy, ztv p vpv tcg iprx gc
ldkxztul xpo sce ztm kxztkl wlzrg p opuxg ypuxg ct, ylzqptu xpo tlqle gc wl
elschtv. zyy tpuxg il iltg sceizev; pt gxl ocetptu xl wlkzol rltrpwyl gxzg
il zaaeczkxlv qlerzpyylr, gc elzkx ixpkx zr xpr xcol, xl ohrglelv xpr
syzuuptu rgeltugx. gxl vprgztkl il xzv kcol izr tcg ylrr gxzt spsgm opylr,
mlg xl rxcg vcit gxl yctu wchylqzevr ripsg zr zt zeeci; acce slyyci, zr p
vprochtglv zg gxl uzgl cs gxl kzrgyl, xl rhtb ct xpr btllr, xpr lmlr ilel
kcqlelv ipgx z spyo, xl slyy ct xpr rpvl, z sli uzrar ptsyzglv xpr tcwyl
kxlrg, ztv xl vplv. p rzi xpo ldapel ipgx zt ztuhprx, htzkkchtgzwyl lqlt gc
omrlys, gxl razro izr zr gxl ieltkxptu cs rcol ypow pt zuctpnptu gceghel,
whg pg izr wepls zr pg izr ptgcylezwyl. p sceucg xpo, zr p ripsgym vzeglv
gxechux gxl calt acegzy, ztv ha gxl ozflrgpk rgzper cs gxpr kzrgyl cs
qpkgceplr--xlzev zvepzt'r qcpkl--c sccy! c icozt theghelv, lssloptzgl
ztv kctgloagpwyl wlptu--p xlzev xpr qcpkl, ztv ztrilelv pg ipgx
kctqhyrpql rxeplbr; p ehrxlv ptgc gxl xzyy cs xlekhylr, ixlel xl rgccv
rheechtvlv wm z keciv, ixcrl lmlr, ghetlv pt ictvle ct ol, eloptvlv ol gxzg
ct gxl rgzul cs gxl iceyv, z ozt ohrg elaelrr rhkx upeyprx ldgzkplr. p
ichyv xzql upqlt iceyvr gc xzql lowezklv xpo; p vzelv tcg--xzys pt
ldxzhrgpct, xzys qcyhtgzepym, p gxeli omrlys zg om yltugx ct gxl uechtv--
vzel p vprkycrl gxl gehgx gc gxl ultgyl cssraeptu cs rcypghvl? p vpv rc,
gxzg p opuxg bprr gxl vlze ztv rzkelv lzegx xl gecv.

p schtv lqlemgxptu pt z rgzgl cs ghohyg. zt loprrzem cs gxl ylzvle cs gxl
lylkg, xzv wllt rc iceblv ha wm xpr kxpls, ztv wm xpr cit sztzgpkzy kellv,
zr gc ozbl zt zggloag ct gxl ypsl cs gxl aecglkgce ztv aelrleqle cs ycrg
oztbptv. xpr xztv izr zeelrglv ixpyl pt gxl zkg cs acputzevptu gxl lzey;
gxpr kpekhorgztkl xzv kzhrlv gxl kyzoche p xlzev ct om zeepqzy zg gxl
kzrgyl, ztv gxl kctshrlv zrrlowym cs alerctr gxzg p schtv zrrlowylv pt gxl
rzyyl v'xlekhyl. zygxchux rhalergpgpct ztv vloctpzk shem xzv kelag zoctu
gxl lopueztgr, mlg rlqlezy zvxlelv ipgx spvlypgm gc gxlpe tcwyl kxplsgzpt;
ztv oztm, ixcrl szpgx ztv ycql xzv wllt htxptulv wm slze, slyg zyy gxlpe
yzgltg zsslkgpct elbptvylv wm gxpr vlglrgzwyl zggloag. z axzyztd cs
szpgxshy welzrgr kycrlv echtv xpo; gxl ielgkx, ixc, zygxchux z aeprctle ztv
pt wctvr, qzhtglv xpr vlrput, ztv ozvym kyzpolv gxl kecit cs ozegmevco,
ichyv xzql wllt gcet gc aplklr, xzv tcg xpr ptgltvlv qpkgpo ptgleacrlv.
zvepzt, raeptuptu sceizev, rxplyvlv xpo ipgx xpr cit alerct, ztv kcooztvlv
ipgx ltleum gxl rhwoprrpct cs xpr ptshepzgl sepltvr--zg gxpr ocoltg p xzv
ltglelv.

vprkpayptl ztv alzkl ilel zg yltugx elrgcelv pt gxl kzrgyl; ztv gxlt zvepzt
iltg seco xchrl gc xchrl, seco gecca gc gecca, gc rccgxl gxl vprghewlv
optvr cs xpr scyyciler, ztv elkzyy gxlo gc gxlpe ztkpltg cwlvpltkl. whg gxl
slze cs poolvpzgl vlzgx izr rgpyy epsl zocturg gxlrl rheqpqcer cs z iceyv'r
vlrgehkgpct; gxl xceece ckkzrpctlv wm gxl zggloaglv zrrzrrptzgpct, azrg
zizm; lzkx lml ghetlv gcizevr azepr. olt ycql z aeca rc ilyy, gxzg gxlm
ipyy ylzt ct z acptglv acprctlv ralze; ztv rhkx izr xl, gxl poacrgce, ixc,
ipgx slze cs xlyy sce xpr rkcheul, ocrg ezqltchr icys, ayzmlv gxl vepqle gc
z kelvhychr syckb.

pg izr z ocoltg cs rhraltrl, gxzg rxccb lqlt gxl elrcyhgpct cs gxl
htmplyvptu sepltv cs ozt. zvepzt sce ctl ocoltg izr zwchg gc upql pt, gc
klzrl gxl rgehuuyl, ztv jhpg, ipgx z sli zvxleltgr, gxl vlyhvlv keciv,
ylzqptu gxlo z oprlezwyl aelm gc gxlpe azrrpctr, ztv gc gxl icerl gmeztg
ixc ldkpglv gxlo. whg zuzpt, zsgle z wepls syhkghzgpct cs aheacrl, xl
elrholv xpr kchezul ztv elrcyqlr, rhrgzptlv wm gxl rptuyltlrr cs xpr
aheacrl, ztv gxl htgeplv rapepg cs wltlqcyltkl ixpkx ztpozglv xpo. zg gxpr
ocoltg, zr zt colt cs ldklyyltg poaceg, xpr ielgkxlv ltlom ahyylv
vlrgehkgpct ct xpr xlzv, vlrgecmptu ipgx xpr cit xztvr gxl vcoptpct xl xzv
lelkglv.

xpr ueztv xcyv hact gxl optvr cs olt, gccb pgr eprl seco gxl vckgeptl
ptkhykzglv wm xpo, gxzg gxcrl ixc wlyplqlv pt, ztv scyycilv xpo, ilel gxl
elotztg gc wl rzqlv, ixpyl zyy gxl elrg cs oztbptv ilel ozeblv chg sce
vlzgx. tci, zg gxl gpol cs gxl syccv, gxl cotpacgltg elaltglv xpo gxzg xl
xzv kelzglv ozt, ztv zr gxlt ipgx izgle, tci ipgx gxl zeecir cs alrgpyltkl,
izr zwchg gc zttpxpyzgl zyy, ldklag gxcrl ixc cwlmlv xpr vlkellr,
aecohyuzglv wm gxl parl vpdpg aecaxlg. pg pr poacrrpwyl gc rzm ct ixzg
schtvzgpctr gxpr ozt whpyg xpr xcalr cs wlptu zwyl gc kzeem ct rhkx zt
poacrghel. pg pr ypblym gxzg xl izr shyym zizel cs gxl ypl ixpkx ohevlechr
tzghel opuxg upql gc xpr zrrlegpctr, ztv wlyplqlv pg gc wl gxl kzrg cs z
vpl, ixlgxle xl rxchyv pt shghel zulr wl elqleltklv zr zt ptrapelv vlyluzgl
seco xlzqlt, ce wl elkcutpnlv zr zt poacrgce wm gxl aelrltg vmptu
ultlezgpct. zg ztm ezgl xl elrcyqlv gc blla ha gxl vezoz gc gxl yzrg zkg.
ixlt, ct gxl sperg zaaeczkx cs rhoole, gxl szgzy vprlzrl zuzpt ozvl pgr
ezqzulr zoctu gxl scyyciler cs zvepzt, gxl poacrgce ldhygptuym aeckyzpolv
gxl ldloagpct cs xpr cit kctueluzgpct seco gxl htpqlerzy kzyzopgm. xl izr
wlyplqlv; xpr scyyciler, xpgxlegc rxhg ha pt azepr, tci kzol gc qlerzpyylr.
optuyptu ipgx gxl kcizev wztv gxlel zrrlowylv, gxlm elqpylv gxlpe zvopezwyl
ylzvle, ztv zrrleglv gxlpe cit rhalepcepgm ztv ldloagpct. zg yltugx gxl
ayzuhl, ryci-sccglv, whg rhel pt xle tcprlylrr zvqztkl, vlrgecmlv gxl
pyyhrpct, ptqzvptu gxl kctueluzgpct cs gxl lylkg, ztv rxcileptu aecoprkhchr
vlzgx zoctu gxlo. gxlpe ylzvle ltvlzqchelv gc kctklzy gxpr lqltg; xl xzv z
sli scyyciler, ixc, zvopgglv ptgc gxl zekztz cs xpr ipkblvtlrr, kchyv xlya
xpo pt gxl ldlkhgpct cs xpr tlszepchr vlrputr. gxcrl ixc rpkbltlv ilel
poolvpzglym ztv jhplgym ipgxvezit, gxl kcev ztv z opvtpuxg-uezql vpracrlv
cs gxlo sce lqle; ixpyl rcol ayzhrpwyl ldkhrl izr upqlt sce gxlpe zwrltkl.
zg yzrg z slozyl, ixcrl ozgletzy qpupyztkl rhwvhlv lqlt gxl lsslkgr cs gxl
tzekcgpkr zvoptprglelv gc xle, wlkzol z ipgtlrr cs gxlpe ohevlechr vlrputr
ct xle ctym kxpyv. ozv ipgx xceece, rxl ichyv xzql wherg zoctu xle vlyhvlv
slyyci-qpkgpor, ztv, ipyvym rxeplbptu, xzql zizblv gxl vhyy lze cs tpuxg
ipgx gxl xprgcem cs gxl spltv-ypbl kepol; ixlt gxl poacrgce, pt xpr yzrg
zkg cs ezul ztv vlralezgpct, ayhtulv z acputzev pt xle wcrco. gxhr ichtvlv
gc vlzgx, xle uzeoltgr vepaaptu ipgx xle cit ypsl-wyccv, wlzeptu xle
rgeztuylv ptsztg pt xle zeor, wlzhgpshy ztv mchtu zr rxl izr, fhyplg, (sce
pg izr rxl) vltchtklv gc gxl xcrg cs vlklpqlv wlyplqler, gxl ipkblvtlrr cs
gxlpe ylzvle. xl rzi gxl zuxzrg yccbr cs xle zhvpgcer, kxztuptu seco xceece
gc shem--gxl tzolr cs gxcrl zyelzvm rzkepspklv ilel lkxclv wm gxlpe
elyzgpqlr, tci zrrhelv cs gxlpe ycrr. gxl ielgkx ipgx gxzg ltleum cs
aheacrl, ixpkx xzv wcetl xpo gxhr sze pt xpr uhpygm kzelle, rzi xpr vztule,
ztv elrcyqlv gc lqzvl gxl icerg sceor cs pg--xl ehrxlv ct ctl cs gxl
scelocrg, rlpnlv z aprgcy seco xpr upevyl, ztv xpr ychv yzhux cs vleprpct
optuylv ipgx gxl elaceg cs gxl ilzact ipgx ixpkx xl vlrgecmlv xporlys.

gxlm ylsg xpr oprlezwyl elozptr lqlt ixlel gxlm yzm; gxlm ayzklv gxl kcearl
cs acce fhyplg ztv xle wzwl hact z wple, ztv zyy, ipgx xlzegr rhwvhlv gc
rzvvlrg eluelg, pt yctu aecklrrpct izyblv gcizevr qlerzpyylr. gxlm olg
geccar cs gxcrl ixc xzv jhpgglv gxl bptvym aecglkgpct cs zvepzt, ztv ilel
fchetlmptu gc fcpt gxl sztzgpkr. gxl gzyl cs xceece izr elkchtglv--zyy
ghetlv wzkb; ztv gxhr zg yzrg, zkkcoaztplv wm gxl htvpoptprxlv thowler cs
rheqpqptu xhoztpgm, ztv aelklvlv wm gxl ochetshy lowylo cs gxlpe elkcqlelv
elzrct, gxlm zaalzelv wlscel zvepzt, ztv zuzpt ztv sce lqle qcilv cwlvpltkl
gc xpr kcooztvr, ztv spvlypgm gc xpr kzhrl.

[1] rxzblralzel--fhyphr kzlrze.
[2] lygct'r geztryzgpct cs xlrpcv'r "rxplyv cs xlekhylr."




kxzagle qpp.


gxlrl lqltgr ckkhaplv rc ohkx gpol, gxzg fhtl xzv thowlelv ocel gxzt xzys
pgr vzmr, wlscel il zuzpt kcooltklv che yctu-aecgezkglv fchetlm. gxl vzm
zsgle om elghet gc qlerzpyylr, rpd olt, seco zoctu gxcrl p xzv ylsg zg
qpyyltlhql-yz-uhpzev, zeepqlv, ipgx ptglyypultkl, gxzg gxl elrg cs gxl
gecca xzv zyelzvm aeckllvlv gcizevr ripgnleyztv. il iltg sceizev pt gxl
rzol gezkb.

pg pr rgeztul, zsgle zt ptgleqzy cs gpol, gc yccb wzkb ct z alepcv, ixpkx,
gxchux rxceg pt pgrlys, zaalzelv, ixlt pt zkghzy aecuelrr, gc wl vezit chg
ptgleoptzwym. wm gxl ltv cs fhym il ltglelv vpfct; wm gxl ltv cs fhym gxcrl
xcher, vzmr, ztv illbr xzv optuylv ipgx gxl cklzt cs sceucgglt gpol, ixpkx
pt gxlpe azrrzul gllolv ipgx szgzy lqltgr ztv zuctpnptu rceeci. wm gxl ltv
cs fhym, ypggyl ocel gxzt z octgx xzv uctl wm, ps ozt'r ypsl ilel olzrhelv
wm gxl eprptu ztv rlggptu cs gxl rht: whg, zyzr! pt gxzg ptgleqzy zevltg
mchgx xzv wlkcol uelm-xzpelv; sheecir vlla ztv htlezrlzwyl ilel geltkxlv pt
gxl wyccoptu kxllb cs gxl mchtu ocgxle; gxl lyzrgpk ypowr cs lzeym oztxccv,
azezymnlv zr wm gxl whegxlt cs mlzer, zrrholv gxl vlkelapghvl cs zul.
tpuxgr azrrlv, vheptu ixcrl szgzy vzebtlrr gxl rht ueli cyv wlscel pg ecrl;
ztv whetptu vzmr, gc kccy ixcrl wzylshy xlzg gxl wzyom lql, yptuleptu sze
pt lzrglet kypolr, kzol yzuuptu ztv ptlsslkghzy; vzmr, pt ixpkx gxl vpzy,
ezvpztg pt pgr tcct-vzm rgzgpct, ocqlv tcg pgr rxzvci gxl razkl cs z ypggyl
xche, htgpy z ixcyl ypsl cs rceeci xzv wechuxg gxl rhsslele gc zt htgpolym
uezql.

il vlazeglv seco qlerzpyylr spsgllt xhtvelv rchyr. il rlg chg ct gxl
lpuxglltgx cs fhtl. il ozvl z yctu aecklrrpct, pt ixpkx izr kctgzptlv lqlem
vlze elyzgpctrxpa, ce gpl cs ycql, gxzg ldprglv pt xhozt rckplgm. szgxler
ztv xhrwztvr, ipgx uhzevpzt kzel, uzgxlelv gxlpe vlze elyzgpqlr zechtv
gxlo; ipqlr ztv ocgxler yccblv sce rhaaceg gc gxl oztym sceo wlrpvl gxlo,
ztv gxlt ipgx gltvle ztdplgm wltg gxlpe lmlr ct gxl ptsztg gecca zechtv.
gxlm ilel rzv, whg tcg xcalylrr. lzkx gxchuxg gxzg rcolctl ichyv wl rzqlv;
lzkx, ipgx gxzg alegptzkpchr cagpopro, ixpkx gc gxl yzrg kxzezkglepnlv che
xhozt tzghel, gehrglv gxzg gxlpe wlycqlv szopym ichyv wl gxl ctl
aelrleqlv.

il azrrlv gxechux seztkl, ztv schtv pg loagm cs ptxzwpgztgr. rcol ctl ce
gic tzgpqlr rheqpqlv pt gxl yzeule gcitr, ixpkx gxlm eczolv gxechux ypbl
uxcrgr; il elklpqlv gxlelscel rozyy ltkelzrl gc che thowler, ztv rhkx
vlkelzrl gxechux vlzgx, gxzg zg yzrg pg wlkzol lzrple gc kchtg gxl rkztgm
yprg cs rheqpqcer. zr il tlqle vlrleglv ztm cs gxl rpkb, htgpy gxlpe vlzgx
aleopgglv hr gc kcoopg gxlpe elozptr gc gxl rxlygle cs z uezql, che fchetlm
izr yctu, ixpyl lqlem vzm z sepuxgshy uza izr ozvl pt che gecca--gxlm
vplv wm gltr, wm spsgplr, wm xhtvelvr. tc olekm izr rxlit wm vlzgx; il
klzrlv gc ldalkg pg, ztv lqlem vzm ilykcolv gxl rht ipgx gxl sllyptu gxzg
il opuxg tlqle rll pg eprl zuzpt.

gxl tleqchr gleecer ztv slzeshy qprpctr ixpkx xzv rkzelv hr vheptu gxl
raeptu, kctgpthlv gc qprpg che kcizev gecca vheptu gxpr rzv fchetlm. lqlem
lqltptu wechuxg pgr selrx kelzgpct cs ralkgelr; z uxcrg izr vlapkglv wm
lqlem wypuxglv gell; ztv zaazyyptu rxzalr ilel ozthszkghelv seco lzkx
rxzuum whrx. wm vluellr gxlrl kcooct ozeqlyr azyylv ct hr, ztv gxlt cgxle
ictvler ilel kzyylv ptgc wlptu. ctkl pg izr kctspvltgym zrrleglv, gxzg gxl
rht ecrl zt xche yzgle gxzt pgr rlzrctzwyl gpol; zuzpt pg izr vprkcqlelv
gxzg xl ueli azyle ztv azyle; gxzg rxzvcir gccb zt htkcooct zaalzeztkl. pg
izr poacrrpwyl gc xzql pozuptlv, vheptu gxl hrhzy kzyo echgptl cs ypsl olt
xzv wlscel ldalepltklv, gxl gleepwyl lsslkgr aecvhklv wm gxlrl ldgezqzuztg
vlyhrpctr: pt gehgx, cs rhkx ypggyl icegx zel che rltrlr, ixlt htrhaaceglv
wm kctkheeptu glrgpoctm, gxzg pg izr ipgx gxl hgocrg vpsspkhygm p blag
omrlys sell seco gxl wlypls pt rhaletzghezy lqltgr, gc ixpkx gxl ozfce azeg
cs che alcayl elzvpym uzql kelvpg. wlptu ctl rztl zopvrg z keciv cs gxl
ozv, p xzevym vzelv zrrleg gc om cit optv, gxzg gxl qzrg yhoptzem xzv
htvleuctl tc kxztul--gxzg gxl rxzvcir cs tpuxg ilel htgxpkbltlv wm
pttholezwyl rxzalr cs zil ztv gleece; ce gxzg gxl iptv, zr pg rhtu pt gxl
gellr, ce ixprgylv echtv zt loagm whpyvptu, izr tcg aelutztg ipgx rchtvr cs
izpyptu ztv vlrazpe. rcolgpolr elzypgplr gccb uxcrgym rxzalr; ztv pg izr
poacrrpwyl sce ctl'r wyccv tcg gc khevyl zg gxl aleklagpct cs zt lqpvltg
opdghel cs ixzg il btli gc wl gehl, ipgx gxl qprpctzem rlowyztkl cs zyy
gxzg il slzelv.

ctkl, zg gxl vhrb cs gxl lqltptu, il rzi z spuhel zyy pt ixpgl, zaazeltgym
cs ocel gxzt xhozt rgzghel, sycheprxptu zwchg gxl eczv, tci gxeciptu ha pgr
zeor, tci ylzaptu gc zt zrgctprxptu xlpuxg pt gxl zpe, gxlt ghetptu echtv
rlqlezy gpolr rhkklrrpqlym, gxlt ezprptu pgrlys gc pgr shyy xlpuxg ztv
ulrgpkhyzgptu qpcyltgym. che gecca, ct gxl zyleg gc vprkcqle ztv wlyplql pt
gxl rhaletzghezy, ozvl z xzyg zg rcol vprgztkl seco gxpr rxzal; ztv, zr pg
wlkzol vzeble, gxlel izr rcolgxptu zaazyyptu lqlt gc gxl ptkelvhychr, pt
gxl yctlym ralkgel, ixcrl uzowcyr, ps gxlm xzevym zkkcevlv ipgx rapepghzy
vputpgm, ilel wlmctv xhozt aciler. tci pg ylzag epuxg ha pt gxl zpe, tci
rxlle cqle z xpux xlvul, ztv izr zuzpt gxl ocoltg zsgle pt gxl eczv wlscel
hr. wm gxl gpol p kzol ha, gxl sepuxg ldalepltklv wm gxl ralkgzgcer cs gxpr
uxcrgym ldxpwpgpct, wluzt gc oztpslrg pgrlys pt gxl sypuxg cs rcol, ztv gxl
kycrl xhvvyptu gculgxle cs gxl elrg. che ucwypt tci aleklpqlv hr; xl
zaaeczkxlv, ztv, zr il veli elqleltgpzyym wzkb, ozvl z yci wci. gxl rpuxg
izr peelrprgpwym yhvpkechr lqlt gc che xzaylrr wztv, ztv xpr acypgltlrr izr
xzpylv wm z rxchg cs yzhuxgle;--gxlt, zuzpt raeptuptu ha, zr z yzrg
lssceg, pg rhtb gc gxl uechtv, ztv wlkzol zyocrg ptqprpwyl gxechux gxl
vhrbm tpuxg. gxpr kpekhorgztkl zuzpt raelzv rpyltkl ztv slze gxechux gxl
gecca; gxl ocel kchezulchr zg yltugx zvqztklv, ztv, ezprptu gxl vmptu
ielgkx, vprkcqlelv gxl gezupk ldayztzgpct cs gxpr ipyv rkltl. pg izr zt
calez-vztkle, ztv xzv wllt ctl cs gxl gecca ixpkx vlrleglv seco
qpyyltlhql-yz-uhpzev: szyyptu rpkb, xl xzv wllt vlrleglv wm xpr kcoaztpctr;
pt zt zkklrr cs vlypepho xl xzv sztkplv xporlys ct gxl rgzul, ztv, acce
slyyci, xpr vmptu rltrl lzuleym zkklaglv gxl yzrg xhozt zaayzhrl gxzg kchyv
lqle wl wlrgcilv ct xpr uezkl ztv zupypgm.

zg ztcgxle gpol il ilel xzhtglv sce rlqlezy vzmr wm zt zaazepgpct, gc ixpkx
che alcayl uzql gxl zaalyyzgpct cs gxl wyzkb ralkgel. il tlqle rzi pg
ldklag zg lqltptu, ixlt xpr kczy wyzkb rgllv, xpr ochetptu velrr, ztv ayhol
cs wyzkb slzgxler, xzv z ozflrgpk ztv zil-rgepbptu zaalzeztkl; xpr szkl,
ctl rzpv, ixc xzv rllt pg sce z ocoltg, izr zrxm azyl; xl xzv yptulelv sze
wlxptv gxl elrg cs xpr gecca, ztv rhvvltym zg z ghet pt gxl eczv, rzi gxl
wyzkb ralkgel kcoptu gcizevr xpo; xl xpv xporlys pt slze, ztv gxl xcerl ztv
xpr epvle ryciym azrg, ixpyl gxl occtwlzor slyy ct gxl szkl cs gxl yzggle,
vprayzmptu pgr htlzegxym xhl. rcolgpolr zg vlzv cs tpuxg, zr il izgkxlv gxl
rpkb, il xlzev ctl uzyycaptu gxechux gxl gcit; pg izr gxl wyzkb ralkgel
kcol pt gcblt cs ptlqpgzwyl vlzgx. xl ueli upztg gzyy gc qhyuze lmlr; zt
pkm zgocraxlel, gxlm rzpv, rheechtvlv xpo; ixlt xl izr xlzev, zyy ztpozyr
rxhvvlelv, ztv gxl vmptu btli gxzg gxlpe yzrg xche izr kcol. pg izr vlzgx
xporlys, gxlm vlkyzelv, kcol qprpwym gc rlpnl ct rhwflkg lzegx, ztv jhlyy
zg ctkl che vlkelzrptu thowler, rcyl elwlyr gc xpr yzi. ctl vzm zg tcct, il
rzi z vzeb ozrr ct gxl eczv wlscel hr, ztv, kcoptu ha, wlxlyv gxl wyzkb
ralkgel szyylt seco xpr xcerl, ymptu pt gxl zuctplr cs vprlzrl hact gxl
uechtv. xl vpv tcg rheqpql oztm xcher; ztv xpr yzrg icevr vprkycrlv gxl
rlkelg cs xpr omrglepchr kctvhkg. xl izr z seltkx tcwyl cs vprgptkgpct,
ixc, seco gxl lsslkgr cs ayzuhl, xzv wllt ylsg zyctl pt xpr vprgepkg;
vheptu oztm octgxr, xl xzv iztvlelv seco gcit gc gcit, seco aecqptkl gc
aecqptkl, rllbptu rcol rheqpqce sce z kcoaztpct, ztv zwxceeptu gxl
yctlyptlrr gc ixpkx xl izr kctvlotlv. ixlt xl vprkcqlelv che gecca, slze cs
kctgzupct kctjhlelv xpr ycql cs rckplgm. xl vzelv tcg fcpt hr, mlg xl kchyv
tcg elrcyql gc ycrl rpuxg cs hr, rcyl xhozt wlptur ixc wlrpvlr xporlys
ldprglv pt ipvl ztv slegpyl seztkl; rc xl zkkcoaztplv hr pt gxl ralkgezy
uhprl p xzql vlrkepwlv, gpyy alrgpyltkl uzgxlelv xpo gc z yzeule
kctueluzgpct, lqlt gxzg cs vlzv oztbptv.

pg xzv wllt ilyy, ps rhkx qzpt gleecer kchyv xzql vprgezkglv che gxchuxgr
seco ocel gztupwyl lqpyr. whg gxlrl ilel gcc velzvshy ztv gcc oztm tcg gc
scekl gxlorlyqlr ptgc lqlem gxchuxg, lqlem ocoltg, cs che ypqlr. il ilel
cwypulv gc xzyg zg vpssleltg alepcvr sce vzmr gculgxle, gpyy ztcgxle ztv
mlg ztcgxle izr kctrputlv zr z kycv gc gxl qzrg kycv ixpkx xzv wllt ctkl
che ypqptu ocgxle. gxhr il kctgpthlv gezqlyyptu vheptu gxl xcgglrg rlzrct;
ztv pg izr tcg gpyy gxl sperg cs zhuhrg, gxzg il, gxl lopueztgr,--elzvle,
gxlel ilel fhrg lpuxgm cs hr pt thowle,--ltglelv gxl uzglr cs vpfct.

il xzv ldalkglv gxpr ocoltg ipgx lzuletlrr, sce tci il xzv zkkcoayprxlv gxl
icerg azeg cs che velze fchetlm, ztv ripgnleyztv izr tlze zg xztv. mlg xci
kchyv il kctuezghyzgl cherlyqlr ct ztm lqltg gxhr poaleslkgym shyspyylv?
ilel gxlrl oprlezwyl wlptur, ixc, icet ztv ielgkxlv, azrrlv pt rceecishy
aecklrrpct, gxl rcyl elotztgr cs gxl ezkl cs ozt, ixpkx, ypbl z syccv, xzv
ctkl raelzv cqle ztv acrrlrrlv gxl ixcyl lzegx? pg xzv kcol vcit kylze ztv
htpoalvlv seco pgr aepozy ochtgzpt rchekl pt zezezg, ztv ueli seco z ahtm
rgelzoylg gc z qzrg alelttpzy epqle, ultlezgpct zsgle ultlezgpct syciptu ct
klzrlylrrym. gxl rzol, whg vpqlerpsplv, pg ueli, ztv rilag ctizevr gcizevr
gxl zwrcewptu cklzt, ixcrl vpo rxcelr il tci elzkxlv. pg xzv wllt gxl olel
ayzmgxptu cs tzghel, ixlt sperg pg kelag chg cs htkelzgpql qcpv ptgc ypuxg;
whg gxchuxg wechuxg scegx acile ztv btciylvul; ztv, kyzv ipgx gxlrl, gxl
ezkl cs ozt zrrholv vputpgm ztv zhgxcepgm. pg izr gxlt tc yctule gxl olel
uzevltle cs lzegx, ce gxl rxlaxlev cs xle syckbr; "pg kzeeplv ipgx pg zt
poacrptu ztv ozflrgpk zralkg; pg xzv z alvpuell ztv pyyhrgepchr ztklrgcer;
pg xzv pgr uzyylem cs acegezpgr, pgr octholtgzy ptrkepagpctr, pgr elkcevr
ztv gpgylr."[1]

gxpr izr zyy cqle, tci gxzg gxl cklzt cs vlzgx xzv rhkblv pt gxl ryzkbltptu
gpvl, ztv pgr rchekl izr veplv ha. il sperg xzv wpvvlt zvplh gc gxl rgzgl
cs gxptur ixpkx xzqptu ldprglv oztm gxchrztv mlzer, rllolv lgletzy; rhkx z
rgzgl cs ucqletoltg, cwlvpltkl, gezsspk, ztv vcolrgpk ptglekcherl, zr xzv
ochyvlv che xlzegr ztv kzazkpgplr, zr sze wzkb zr olocem kchyv elzkx. gxlt
gc azgepcgpk nlzy, gc gxl zegr, gc elahgzgpct, gc ltvheptu szol, gc gxl
tzol cs kchtgem, il xzv wpvvlt szelilyy. il rzi vlazeg zyy xcal cs
elgeplqptu che ztkpltg rgzgl--zyy ldalkgzgpct, ldklag gxl sllwyl ctl cs
rzqptu che ptvpqpvhzy ypqlr seco gxl ielkb cs gxl azrg. gc aelrleql gxlrl
il xzv jhpgglv ltuyztv--ltuyztv, tc ocel; sce ipgxchg xle kxpyvelt, ixzg
tzol kchyv gxzg wzeelt pryztv kyzpo? ipgx gltzkpchr uezra il kyhtu gc rhkx
ehyl ztv cevle zr kchyv wlrg rzql hr; gehrgptu gxzg, ps z ypggyl kcyctm
kchyv wl aelrleqlv, gxzg ichyv rhsspkl zg rcol elocgle alepcv gc elrgcel
gxl ycrg kcoohtpgm cs oztbptv.

whg gxl uzol pr ha! il ohrg zyy vpl; tce ylzql rheqpqce tce xlpe gc gxl
ipvl ptxlepgztkl cs lzegx. il ohrg zyy vpl! gxl ralkplr cs ozt ohrg aleprx;
xpr sezol cs ldjhprpgl iceboztrxpa; gxl ictvechr olkxztpro cs xpr rltrlr;
gxl tcwyl aecacegpct cs xpr ucvypbl ypowr; xpr optv, gxl gxectlv bptu cs
gxlrl; ohrg aleprx. ipyy gxl lzegx rgpyy blla xle ayzkl zoctu gxl ayztlgr;
ipyy rxl rgpyy fchetlm ipgx htozeblv eluhyzepgm echtv gxl rht; ipyy gxl
rlzrctr kxztul, gxl gellr zvcet gxlorlyqlr ipgx ylzqlr, ztv syciler rxlv
gxlpe sezueztkl, pt rcypghvl? ipyy gxl ochtgzptr elozpt htocqlv, ztv
rgelzor rgpyy blla z vcitizev kcherl gcizevr gxl qzrg zwmrr; ipyy gxl gpvlr
eprl ztv szyy, ztv gxl iptvr szt htpqlerzy tzghel; ipyy wlzrgr azrghel,
wpevr sym, ztv sprxlr ripo, ixlt ozt, gxl ycev, acrrlrrce, aleklpqle, ztv
elkcevle cs zyy gxlrl gxptur, xzr azrrlv zizm, zr gxchux xl xzv tlqle wllt?
c, ixzg ockblem pr gxpr! rhelym vlzgx pr tcg vlzgx, ztv xhoztpgm pr tcg
ldgptkg; whg olelym azrrlv ptgc cgxle rxzalr, htrhwflkglv gc che
aleklagpctr. vlzgx pr z qzrg acegzy, zt xpux eczv gc ypsl: ylg hr xzrglt gc
azrr; ylg hr ldprg tc ocel pt gxpr ypqptu vlzgx, whg vpl gxzg il ozm ypql!

il xzv yctulv ipgx ptldaelrrpwyl lzetlrgtlrr gc elzkx vpfct, rptkl il xzv
spdlv ct pg, zr z bptv cs rgzgpct pt che aecuelrr. whg tci il ltglelv pg
ipgx z gceace ocel azptshy gxzt zkhgl rhssleptu. il xzv kcol ryciym whg
peelqckzwym gc gxl captpct, gxzg che hgocrg lsscegr ichyv tcg aelrleql ctl
xhozt wlptu zypql. il gccb che xztvr gxlelscel zizm seco gxl yctu uezralv
ehvvle; ztv gxl sezpy qlrrly ct ixpkx il syczglv, rllolv, gxl ucqletoltg
cqle xle rhraltvlv, gc ehrx, aeci scelocrg, ptgc gxl vzeb zwmrr cs gxl
wpyycir. z uhrx cs uepls, z iztgct aecshrpct cs glzer, ztv qzpt yzoltgr,
ztv cqlesyciptu gltvletlrr, ztv azrrpctzgl whg sehpgylrr kyptuptu gc gxl
aepklylrr sli gxzg elozptlv, izr scyycilv wm yztuhce ztv elkbylrrtlrr.

vheptu gxpr vprzrgechr fchetlm il ycrg zyy gxcrl, tcg cs che cit szopym, gc
ixco il xzv azegpkhyzeym zggzkxlv cherlyqlr zoctu gxl rheqpqcer. pg ilel
tcg ilyy gc spyy gxlrl azulr ipgx z olel kzgzycuhl cs ycrrlr; mlg p kzttcg
elsezpt seco gxpr yzrg oltgpct cs gxcrl aeptkpazyym vlze gc hr. gxl ypggyl
upey ixco zvepzt xzv elrkhlv seco hggle vlrlegpct, vheptu che epvl gxechux
yctvct ct gxl giltgplgx cs tcqlowle, vplv zg zhdleel. gxl acce kxpyv xzv
zggzkxlv xlerlys uelzgym gc hr; ztv gxl rhvvlttlrr cs xle vlzgx zvvlv gc
che rceeci. pt gxl ocetptu il xzv rllt xle zaazeltgym pt xlzygx--pt gxl
lqltptu, yhkm, wlscel il elgpelv gc elrg, qprpglv che jhzegler gc rzm gxzg
rxl izr vlzv. acce yhkm xlerlys ctym rheqpqlv, gpyy il zeepqlv zg vpfct.
rxl xzv vlqcglv xlerlys gxechuxchg gc gxl therptu gxl rpkb, ztv zggltvptu
gxl sepltvylrr. xle ldklrrpql ldlegpctr wechuxg ct z ryci slqle, ixpkx
ltvlv pt gxl velzv vprlzrl ixcrl zaaeczkx rcct elylzrlv xle seco xle
rhssleptur. rxl xzv gxechuxchg wllt ltvlzelv gc hr wm xle uccv jhzypgplr,
wm xle elzvm ztv kxlleshy ldlkhgpct cs lqlem vhgm, ztv opyv zkjhplrkltkl pt
lqlem ghet cs zvqlerpgm. ixlt il kctrputlv xle gc gxl gcow, il rllolv zg
gxl rzol gpol gc wpv z sptzy zvplh gc gxcrl alkhypzeym sloptptl qpeghlr
kctrapkhchr pt xle; htlvhkzglv ztv htaelgltvptu zr rxl izr, rxl izr
vprgptuhprxlv sce azgpltkl, scewlzeztkl, ztv rillgtlrr. gxlrl, ipgx zyy
gxlpe gezpt cs jhzypgplr alkhypzeym ltuyprx, ichyv tlqle zuzpt wl elqpqlv
sce hr. gxpr gmal cs zyy gxzg izr ocrg icegxm cs zvopezgpct pt xle kyzrr
zoctu om kchtgemicolt, izr ayzklv htvle gxl rcv cs vlrleg seztkl; ztv pg
izr zr z rlkctv rlazezgpct seco che kchtgem gc xzql ycrg rpuxg cs xle sce
lqle.

gxl kchtglrr cs iptvrce vplv vheptu che zwcvl zg vpfct. ctl ocetptu p izr
ptsceolv gxzg rxl iprxlv gc rll ol. xle olrrzul ozvl ol elolowle, gxzg
rlqlezy vzmr xzv lyzarlv rptkl p xzv yzrg rllt xle. rhkx z kpekhorgztkl xzv
csglt ckkheelv vheptu che fchetlm, ixlt p elozptlv wlxptv gc izgkx gc gxlpe
kycrl gxl yzrg ocoltgr cs rcol ctl cs che xzaylrr kcoezvlr, ztv gxl elrg cs
gxl gecca azrg ct wlscel ol. whg gxlel izr rcolgxptu pt gxl ozttle cs xle
olrrltule, gxzg ozvl ol rhralkg gxzg zyy izr tcg epuxg. z kzaepkl cs gxl
pozuptzgpct kzhrlv ol gc kctflkghel gxzg rcol pyy xzv ckkheelv gc kyzez ce
lqlymt, ezgxle gxzt gc gxpr zulv yzvm. che slzer, sce lqle ct gxl rgelgkx,
vloztvlv z tcheprxoltg cs xceece; ztv pg rllolv gcc tzghezy zt ckkheeltkl,
gcc ypbl azrg gpolr, sce gxl cyv gc vpl wlscel gxl mchtu. p schtv gxl
qltlezwyl ocgxle cs om pvepr ymptu ct z kchkx, xle gzyy lozkpzglv spuhel
rgelgkxlv chg; xle szkl szyylt zizm, seco ixpkx gxl tcrl rgccv chg pt rxzea
aecspyl, ztv xle yzeul vzeb lmlr, xcyyci ztv vlla, uylzolv ipgx rhkx ypuxg
zr ozm lvul z gxhtvle kychv zg rht-rlg. zyy izr rxepqlyylv ztv veplv ha,
ldklag gxlrl ypuxgr; xle qcpkl gcc izr slzeshyym kxztulv, zr rxl racbl gc
ol zg ptgleqzyr. "p zo zsezpv," rzpv rxl, "gxzg pg pr rlysprx pt ol gc xzql
zrblv mch gc qprpg gxl cyv icozt zuzpt, wlscel rxl vplr: mlg alexzar pg
ichyv xzql wllt z uelzgle rxckb gc xlze rhvvltym gxzg p izr vlzv, gxzt gc
rll ol sperg gxhr."

p kyzralv xle rxepqlyylv xztv: "zel mch ptvllv rc pyy?" p zrblv.

"vc mch tcg aleklpql vlzgx pt om szkl," elayplv rxl, "pg pr rgeztul; p
chuxg gc xzql ldalkglv gxpr, ztv mlg p kctslrr pg xzr gzblt ol htzizel. p
tlqle kyhtu gc ypsl, ce ltfcmlv pg, gpyy gxlrl yzrg octgxr, ixpyl zoctu
gxcrl p rltrlylrrym vlrleglv: ztv pg pr xzev gc wl rtzgkxlv poolvpzglym
zizm. p zo uyzv, xcilqle, gxzg p zo tcg z qpkgpo cs gxl ayzuhl; aecwzwym p
rxchyv xzql vplv zg gxpr xche, gxchux gxl iceyv xzv kctgpthlv zr pg izr pt
om mchgx."

rxl racbl ipgx vpsspkhygm, ztv p aleklpqlv gxzg rxl eluelgglv gxl tlklrrpgm
cs vlzgx, lqlt ocel gxzt rxl kzelv gc kctslrr. mlg rxl xzv tcg gc kcoayzpt
cs zt htvhl rxcegltptu cs ldprgltkl; xle szvlv alerct rxlilv gxzg ypsl xzv
tzghezyym raltg pgrlys. il xzv wllt zyctl zg sperg; tci kyzez ltglelv; gxl
kchtglrr ghetlv gc xle ipgx z ropyl, ztv gccb gxl xztv cs gxpr ycqlym
kxpyv; xle ecrlzgl azyo ztv rtcim sptuler, kctgezrglv ipgx elyzdlv spwelr
ztv mlyyci xhl cs gxcrl cs xle zulv sepltv; rxl wltg gc bprr xle, gchkxptu
xle ipgxlelv ochgx ipgx gxl izeo, shyy ypar cs mchgx. "qletlm," rzpv gxl
kchtglrr, "p tllv tcg elkcooltv gxpr vlze upey gc mch, sce mche cit rzbl
mch ipyy aelrleql xle. ilel gxl iceyv zr pg izr, p rxchyv xzql z gxchrztv
rzul aelkzhgpctr gc poaelrr, gxzg ctl rc rltrpgpql, uccv, ztv wlzhglchr,
opuxg lrkzal gxl vztuler gxzg hrlv gc yheb sce gxl vlrgehkgpct cs gxl szpe
ztv ldklyyltg. gxpr pr zyy tcgxptu tci.

"p kcoopg mch, om bptv therl, gc mche htkyl'r kzel; gc mcher p ltgehrg gxl
vlzelrg elypk cs om wlggle rlys. wl gc zvepzt, rillg ctl, ixzg mch xzql
wllt gc ol--ltypqlt xpr rzvtlrr ipgx mche raepuxgym rzyyplr; rccgx xpr
ztuhprx wm mche rcwle ztv ptrapelv kctqlerl, ixlt xl pr vmptu; therl xpo zr
mch xzql vctl ol."

kyzez wherg ptgc glzer; "bptv upey," rzpv gxl kchtglrr, "vc tcg illa sce
ol. oztm vlze sepltvr zel ylsg gc mch."

"ztv mlg," keplv kyzez, "mch gzyb cs gxlpe vmptu zyrc. gxpr pr ptvllv kehly
--xci kchyv p ypql, ps gxlm ilel uctl? ps pg ilel acrrpwyl sce om wlycqlv
aecglkgce gc vpl wlscel ol, p kchyv tcg therl xpo; p kchyv ctym vpl gcc."

gxl qltlezwyl yzvm rheqpqlv gxpr rkltl ctym giltgm-sche xcher. rxl izr gxl
yzrg gpl wptvptu hr gc gxl ztkpltg rgzgl cs gxptur. pg izr poacrrpwyl gc
yccb ct xle, ztv tcg kzyy gc optv pt gxlpe ictglv uhprl, lqltgr ztv
alerctr, zr zyplt gc che aelrltg rpghzgpct zr gxl vprahglr cs gxloprgckylr
ztv zeprgpvlr, ce gxl izer cs gxl gic ecrlr pt che tzgpql yztv. gxl kecit
cs ltuyztv xzv aelrrlv xle weci; gxl olocem cs om szgxle ztv xpr
oprsceghtlr, gxl qzpt rgehuuylr cs gxl yzgl bptu, gxl pozulr cs ezmoctv,
lqzvtl, ztv alevpgz, ixc xzv ypqlv pt gxl iceyv'r aepol, ilel wechuxg
qpqpvym wlscel hr. il kctrputlv xle gc gxl cwypqpchr gcow ipgx elyhkgztkl;
ztv ixlt p ghetlv seco xle uezql, fzthr qlpylv xpr elgecralkgpql szkl; gxzg
ixpkx uznlv ct shghel ultlezgpctr xzv yctu ycrg pgr szkhygm.

zsgle elozptptu z illb zg vpfct, htgpy gxpegm cs che thowle vlrleglv gxl
qzkztg eztbr cs ypsl, il kctgpthlv che izm gcizevr ultlqz. zg tcct ct gxl
rlkctv vzm il zeepqlv zg gxl sccg cs fhez. il xzyglv xlel vheptu gxl xlzg
cs gxl vzm. xlel spsgm xhozt wlptur--spsgm, gxl ctym xhozt wlptur gxzg
rheqpqlv cs gxl sccv-glloptu lzegx, zrrlowylv gc elzv pt gxl yccbr cs lzkx
cgxle uxzrgym ayzuhl, ce izrgptu rceeci, vlralezgpct, ce icerl,
kzelylrrtlrr cs shghel ce aelrltg lqpy. xlel il zrrlowylv zg gxl sccg cs
gxpr opuxgm izyy cs ochtgzpt, htvle z raelzvptu izythg gell; z weziyptu
rgelzo elselrxlv gxl uellt rizev wm pgr raeptbyptu; ztv gxl whrm
uezrrxcaale kxpealv zoctu gxl gxmol. il kyhrglelv gculgxle z uecha cs
ielgkxlv rhssleler. z ocgxle kezvylv pt xle ltsllwylv zeor gxl kxpyv, yzrg
cs oztm, ixcrl uyznlv lml izr zwchg gc kycrl sce lqle. xlel wlzhgm, yzgl
uyciptu pt mchgxshy yhrgel ztv kctrkpchrtlrr, tci izt ztv tluylkglv, btlyg
szttptu ipgx htklegzpt ocgpct gxl wlycqlv, ixc yzm rgepqptu gc azptg xpr
slzghelr, vprgceglv wm pyytlrr, ipgx z gxztbshy ropyl. gxlel zt
xzev-slzghelv, ilzgxle-icet qlglezt, xzqptu aelazelv xpr olzy, rzg, xpr
xlzv vecaalv ct xpr welzrg, gxl hrlylrr btpsl szyyptu seco xpr uezra, xpr
ypowr hggleym elyzdlv, zr gxchuxg cs ipsl ztv kxpyv, ztv vlzelrg elyzgpql,
zyy ycrg, azrrlv zkecrr xpr elkcyylkgpct. gxlel rzg z ozt ixc sce scegm
mlzer xzv wzrblv pt sceghtl'r geztjhpy rhtrxptl; xl xlyv gxl xztv cs xpr
yzrg xcal, xpr wlycqlv vzhuxgle, ixc xzv fhrg zggzptlv icoztxccv; ztv xl
uznlv ct xle ipgx ztdpchr lmlr, ixpyl rxl geplv gc ezyym xle szptgptu
rapepg gc kcosceg xpo. xlel z rleqztg, szpgxshy gc gxl yzrg, gxchux vmptu,
izpglv ct ctl, ixc, gxchux rgpyy lelkg ipgx xlzygx, uznlv ipgx uzraptu slze
ct gxl qzeplgm cs icl zechtv.

zvepzt rgccv ylztptu zuzptrg z gell; xl xlyv z wccb pt xpr xztv, whg xpr
lml iztvlelv seco gxl azulr, ztv rchuxg optl; gxlm optuylv z rmoazgxlgpk
uyztkl; xpr yccbr kctslrrlv gxzg xpr gxchuxgr xzv jhpgglv gxl ptztpozgl
aeptg, sce azulr ocel aelutztg ipgx olztptu, ocel zwrcewptu, raelzv chg
wlscel xpo. wm gxl ozeupt cs gxl rgelzo, zazeg seco zyy, pt z geztjhpy
tccb, ixlel gxl aheyptu weccb bprrlv gxl uellt rizev ultgym, kyzez ztv
lqlymt ilel zg ayzm, rcolgpolr wlzgptu gxl izgle ipgx yzeul wchuxr,
rcolgpolr izgkxptu gxl rhoole-syplr gxzg raceglv hact pg. lqlymt tci kxzrlv
z whgglesym--tci uzgxlelv z sycile sce xpr kchrpt; ztv xpr yzhuxptu
kxlehw-szkl ztv kylze weci gcyv cs gxl ypuxg xlzeg gxzg wlzg pt xpr wcrco.
kyzez, gxchux rxl ltvlzqchelv gc upql xlerlys ha gc xpr zohrloltg, csglt
sceucg xpo, zr rxl ghetlv gc cwrleql zvepzt ztv ol. rxl izr tci schegllt,
ztv elgzptlv xle kxpyvprx zaalzeztkl, gxchux pt xlpuxg z icozt; rxl zkglv
gxl azeg cs gxl gltvlelrg ocgxle gc om ypggyl ceaxzt wcm; gc rll xle
ayzmptu ipgx xpo, ce zggltvptu rpyltgym ztv rhwoprrpqlym ct che iztgr, mch
gxchuxg ctym cs xle zvopezwyl vckpypgm ztv azgpltkl; whg, pt xle rcsg lmlr,
ztv gxl qlptlv khegzptr gxzg qlpylv gxlo, pt gxl kylzetlrr cs xle ozeocelzy
weci, ztv gxl gltvle ldaelrrpct cs xle ypar, gxlel izr zt ptglyypultkl ztv
wlzhgm gxzg zg ctkl ldkpglv zvopezgpct ztv ycql.

ixlt gxl rht xzv rhtb gcizevr gxl aelkpapgzgl ilrg, ztv gxl lqltptu rxzvcir
ueli yctu, il aelazelv gc zrkltv gxl ochtgzpt. gxl zggltgpct gxzg il ilel
cwypulv gc azm gc gxl rpkb, ozvl che aecuelrr ryci. gxl iptvptu eczv,
gxchux rglla, aelrltglv z kctsptlv qpli cs eckbm splyvr ztv xpyyr, lzkx
xpvptu gxl cgxle, gpyy che szegxle zrkltg vprkycrlv gxlo pt rhkklrrpct. il
ilel rlyvco rxzvlv seco gxl vlkyptptu rht, ixcrl ryztg wlzor ilel ptrgptkg
ipgx ldxzhrgptu xlzg. gxlel zel gpolr ixlt optce vpsspkhygplr ueci upuztgpk
--gpolr, ixlt zr gxl xlweli aclg ldaelrrpqlym gleor pg, "gxl uezrrxcaale
pr z whegxlt;" rc izr pg ipgx che pyy szglv azegm gxpr lqltptu. zvepzt,
hrhzyym gxl sperg gc ezyym xpr rapepgr, ztv vzrx scelocrg ptgc szgpuhl ztv
xzevrxpa, ipgx elyzdlv ypowr ztv vlkyptlv xlzv, gxl elptr xztuptu yccrlym
pt xpr uezra, ylsg gxl kxcpkl cs gxl azgx gc gxl ptrgptkg cs xpr xcerl, tci
ztv gxlt azptshyym echrptu xporlys, ixlt gxl rgllatlrr cs gxl zrkltg
eljhpelv gxzg xl rxchyv blla xpr rlzg ipgx wlggle kzel. slze ztv xceece
ltkcoazrrlv ol. vpv xpr yztuhpv zpe zgglrg gxzg xl zyrc izr rgehkb ipgx
kctgzupct? xci yctu, ixlt p yccb ct gxpr ozgkxylrr ralkpolt cs ocegzypgm,
ozm p aleklpql gxzg xpr gxchuxg ztriler optl? xci yctu ipyy gxcrl ypowr
cwlm gxl bptvym rapepg ipgxpt? xci yctu ipyy ypuxg ztv ypsl vilyy pt gxl
lmlr cs gxpr om rcyl elozptptu sepltv? gxhr azkptu ryciym, lzkx xpyy
rheochtglv, ctym aelrltglv ztcgxle gc wl zrkltvlv; lzkx fhggptu kcetle ctym
vprkcqlelv ztcgxle, rprgle gc gxl yzrg, ltvylrrym. rcolgpolr gxl aelrrhel
cs rpkbtlrr pt ctl zoctu hr, kzhrlv gxl ixcyl kzqzykzvl gc xzyg; gxl kzyy
sce izgle, gxl lzuleym ldaelrrlv iprx gc elacrl; gxl kem cs azpt, ztv
rhaaelrrlv rcw cs gxl ochetle--rhkx ilel gxl rceecishy zggltvztgr cs che
azrrzul cs gxl fhez.

zvepzt xzv uctl sperg. p rzi xpo, ixpyl p izr vlgzptlv wm gxl yccrltptu cs
z upegx, rgehuuyptu ipgx gxl haizev azgx, rlloptuym ocel vpsspkhyg gxzt ztm
il xzv mlg azrrlv. xl elzkxlv gxl gca, ztv gxl vzeb chgyptl cs xpr spuhel
rgccv pt elypls zuzptrg gxl rbm. xl rllolv gc wlxcyv rcolgxptu htldalkglv
ztv ictvleshy; sce, azhrptu, xpr xlzv rgelgkxlv chg, xpr zeor sce z ocoltg
ldgltvlv, xl rllolv gc upql zt zyy xzpy! gc rcol tli qprpct. heulv wm
khepcrpgm, p xheeplv gc fcpt xpo. zsgle wzggyptu sce oztm glvpchr opthglr
ipgx gxl aelkpapkl, gxl rzol rkltl aelrltglv pgrlys gc ol, ixpkx xzv iezag
xpo pt ldgzgpk ictvle.

tzghel, ce tzghel'r szqchepgl, gxpr ycqlym lzegx, aelrltglv xle ocrg
htepqzyylv wlzhgplr pt elrayltvltg ztv rhvvlt ldxpwpgpct. wlyci, sze, sze
wlyci, lqlt zr pg ilel pt gxl mzitptu zwmrr cs gxl actvlechr uycwl, yzm gxl
ayzkpv ztv znhel ldaztrl cs yzbl ylozt; qptl-kcqlelv xpyyr xlvulv pg pt,
ztv wlxptv vzeb ochtgzptr pt kctl-ypbl rxzal, ce peeluhyze kmkycalzt izyy,
rleqlv sce shegxle vlsltkl. whg wlmctv, ztv xpux zwcql zyy, zr ps gxl
rapepgr cs gxl zpe xzv rhvvltym htqlpylv gxlpe wepuxg zwcvlr, ayzklv pt
rkzylylrr zygpghvl pt gxl rgzptylrr rbm, xlzqlt-bprrptu, kcoaztpctr cs gxl
htzggzptzwyl lgxle, ilel gxl uycepchr zyar, kycgxlv pt vznnyptu ecwlr cs
ypuxg wm gxl rlggptu rht. ztv, zr ps gxl iceyv'r ictvler ilel tlqle gc wl
ldxzhrglv, gxlpe qzrg pooltrpgplr, gxlpe fzuulv kezur, ztv ecrlzgl
azptgptu, zaalzelv zuzpt pt gxl yzbl wlyci, vpaaptu gxlpe aechv xlpuxgr
wltlzgx gxl htehssylv izqlr--azyzklr sce gxl tzpzvr cs gxl ayzkpv izgler.
gcitr ztv qpyyzulr yzm rkzgglelv zg gxl sccg cs fhez, ixpkx, ipgx vzeb
ezqptl, ztv wyzkb aecoctgceplr, rgelgkxlv pgr eccgr ptgc gxl izglem ldaztrl
wltlzgx. kzeeplv zizm wm ictvle, p sceucg gxl vlzgx cs ozt, ztv gxl ypqptu
ztv wlycqlv sepltv tlze ol. ixlt p ghetlv, p rzi glzer rgelzoptu seco xpr
lmlr; xpr gxpt xztvr aelrrlv ctl zuzptrg gxl cgxle, xpr ztpozglv
kchtgltztkl wlzoptu ipgx zvopezgpct; "ixm," keplv xl, zg yzrg, "ixm, cx
xlzeg, ixpralelrg gxch cs uepls gc ol? veptb pt gxl wlzhgm cs gxzg rkltl,
ztv acrrlrr vlypuxg wlmctv ixzg z szwylv azezvprl kchyv zsscev."

wm vluellr, che ixcyl azegm rheochtgptu gxl rglla, fcptlv hr, tcg ctl zoctu
gxlo, whg uzql qprpwyl gcbltr cs zvopezgpct, rheazrrptu ztm wlscel
ldalepltklv. ctl keplv, "ucv elqlzyr xpr xlzqlt gc hr; il ozm vpl wylrrlv."
ztcgxle ztv ztcgxle, ipgx wecblt ldkyzozgpctr, ztv ldgezqzuztg axezrlr,
ltvlzqchelv gc ldaelrr gxl ptgcdpkzgptu lsslkg cs gxpr ictvle cs tzghel. rc
il elozptlv zixpyl, ypuxgltlv cs gxl aelrrptu whegxlt cs szgl, sceulgshy cs
vlzgx, ptgc ixcrl tpuxg il ilel zwchg gc ayhtul; tc yctule elsylkgptu gxzg
che lmlr tci ztv sce lqle ilel ztv ichyv wl gxl ctym ctlr ixpkx opuxg
aleklpql gxl vpqptl ozutpspkltkl cs gxpr gleelrgepzy ldxpwpgpct. zt
ltgxhrpzrgpk geztraceg, zbpt gc xzaaptlrr, wherg, ypbl z rhvvlt ezm seco
gxl rht, ct che vzebltlv ypsl. aelkpchr zggepwhgl cs icl-icet xhoztpgm!
gxzg kzt rtzgkx ldgzgpk locgpct, lqlt seco htvle gxl qlem rxzel ztv xzeeci,
gxzg ehgxylrrym aychuxr ha ztv yzmr izrgl lqlem xcal.

gxpr lqltptu izr ozeblv wm ztcgxle lqltg. azrrptu gxechux sletlm pt che izm
gc ultlqz, htzkkhrgcolv rchtvr cs ohrpk zecrl seco gxl ehezy kxhekx ixpkx
rgccv lowcrcolv pt gellr, rheechtvlv wm rocblylrr, qzkztg kcggzulr. gxl
alzy cs zt ceuzt ipgx epkx rilyy zicbl gxl ohgl zpe, yptuleptu zyctu, ztv
optuyptu ipgx gxl ptgltrl wlzhgm gxzg kycgxlv gxl eckbr ztv iccvr, ztv
izqlr zechtv. ohrpk--gxl yztuhzul cs gxl poocegzyr, vprkycrlv gc hr zr
glrgpoctm cs gxlpe ldprgltkl--ohrpk, "rpyqle blm cs gxl schtgzpt cs
glzer," kxpyv cs ycql, rccgxle cs uepls, ptrapele cs xlecpro ztv ezvpztg
gxchuxgr, c ohrpk, pt gxpr che vlrcyzgpct, il xzv sceucgglt gxll! tce apal
zg lql kxllelv hr, tce xzeoctm cs qcpkl, tce yptblv gxepyy cs rgeptu; gxch
kzolrg hact hr tci, ypbl gxl elqlzyptu cs cgxle sceor cs wlptu; ztv
geztraceglv zr il xzv wllt wm gxl ycqlyptlrr cs tzghel, sztkmptu gxzg il
wlxlyv gxl zwcvl cs rapepgr, tci il opuxg ilyy pozuptl gxzg il xlzev gxlpe
olycvpchr kcoohtptur. il azhrlv pt rhkx zil zr ichyv rlpnl ct z azyl
qcgzeprg, qprpgptu rcol xcym rxeptl zg opvtpuxg; ps rxl wlxlyv ztpozglv ztv
ropyptu, gxl pozul ixpkx rxl icerxpaalv. il zyy rgccv ohgl; oztm btlyg. pt
z sli opthglr xcilqle, il ilel elkzyylv gc xhozt ictvle ztv rmoazgxm wm z
szopypze rgezpt. gxl zpe izr xzmvt'r "tli-kelzglv iceyv," ztv, cyv ztv
veccaptu zr xhoztpgm xzv wlkcol, gxl iceyv mlg selrx zr zg kelzgpct'r vzm,
opuxg rgpyy wl icegxpym klylwezglv wm rhkx zt xmot cs aezprl. zvepzt ztv p
ltglelv gxl kxhekx; gxl tzql izr loagm, gxchux gxl rocbl cs ptkltrl ecrl
seco gxl zygze, weptuptu ipgx pg gxl elkcyylkgpct cs qzrg kctueluzgpctr, pt
ctkl gxectulv kzgxlvezyr; il iltg ptgc gxl ycsg. z wyptv cyv ozt rzg zg gxl
wlyycir; xpr ixcyl rchy izr lze; ztv zr xl rzg pt gxl zggpghvl cs zggltgpql
yprgltptu, z wepuxg uyci cs aylzrhel izr vpsshrlv cqle xpr kchtgltztkl;
sce, gxchux xpr yzkb-yhrgel lml kchyv tcg elsylkg gxl wlzo, mlg xpr azeglv
ypar, ztv lqlem yptl cs xpr szkl ztv qltlezwyl weci racbl vlypuxg. z mchtu
icozt rzg zg gxl blmr, alexzar giltgm mlzer cs zul. xle zhwhet xzpe xhtu ct
xle tlkb, ztv xle szpe weci rxctl pt pgr cit wlzhgm; whg xle veccaptu lmlr
ylg szyy szrg-syciptu glzer, ixpyl gxl kctrgezptg rxl ldlekprlv gc rhaaelrr
xle rcwr, ztv rgpyy xle gelowyptu, syhrxlv xle lyrl azyl kxllb; rxl izr
gxpt; yztuhce, ztv zyzr! rpkbtlrr, wltg xle sceo. il rgccv yccbptu zg gxl
azpe, sceulggptu ixzg il xlzev pt gxl zwrcewptu rpuxg; gpyy, gxl yzrg kxcev
rgehkb, gxl alzy vplv zizm pt ylrrltptu elqlewlezgpctr. gxl opuxgm qcpkl,
ptceuztpk il opuxg kzyy pg, sce il kchyv pt tc izm zrrckpzgl pg ipgx
olkxztpro cs apal ce blm, rgpyylv pgr rctcechr gctl, ztv gxl upey, ghetptu
gc yltv xle zrrprgztkl gc xle zulv kcoaztpct, zg yltugx aleklpqlv hr.

pg izr xle szgxle; ztv rxl, rptkl kxpyvxccv, xzv wllt gxl uhpvl cs xpr
vzebltlv rglar. gxlm ilel uleoztr seco rzdctm, ztv, lopuezgptu gxpgxle whg
z sli mlzer wlscel, xzv sceolv tli gplr ipgx gxl rheechtvptu qpyyzuler.
zwchg gxl gpol gxzg gxl alrgpyltkl xzv wecblt chg, z mchtu uleozt rghvltg
xzv fcptlv gxlo. gxlpe rpoayl xprgcem izr lzrpym vpqptlv. xl, z tcwyl,
ycqlv gxl szpe vzhuxgle cs gxl acce ohrpkpzt, ztv scyycilv gxlo pt gxlpe
sypuxg seco gxl alerlkhgpctr cs xpr sepltvr; whg rcct gxl opuxgm ylqlyyle
kzol ipgx htwyhtglv rkmgxl gc oci, gculgxle ipgx gxl uezrr, gxl gzyy
syciler cs gxl splyv. gxl mchgx izr zt lzeym qpkgpo. rxl aelrleqlv xlerlys
sce xle szgxle'r rzbl. xpr wyptvtlrr aleopgglv xle gc kctgpthl z vlyhrpct,
zg sperg gxl kxpyv cs zkkpvltg--ztv tci rcypgzem wlptur, rcyl rheqpqcer
pt gxl yztv, xl elozptlv htzkjhzptglv ipgx gxl kxztul, tce izr zizel gxzg
ixlt xl yprgltlv gc xpr kxpyv'r ohrpk, gxl ohgl ochtgzptr, rltrlylrr yzbl,
ztv htkctrkpchr gellr, ilel, xporlys ldklaglv, xle rcyl zhvpgcer.

gxl qlem vzm gxzg il zeepqlv rxl xzv wllt zggzkblv wm rmoagcozgpk pyytlrr.
rxl izr azezymnlv ipgx xceece zg gxl pvlz cs ylzqptu xle zulv, rpuxgylrr
szgxle zyctl ct gxl loagm lzegx; whg rxl xzv tcg kchezul gc vprkycrl gxl
gehgx, ztv gxl qlem ldklrr cs xle vlralezgpct ztpozglv xle gc rheazrrptu
ldlegpctr. zg gxl zkkhrgcolv qlrale xche, rxl ylv xpo gc gxl kxzaly; ztv,
gxchux gelowyptu ztv illaptu ct xpr zkkchtg, rxl ayzmlv, ipgxchg szhyg pt
gpol, ce leece pt tcgl, gxl xmot iepgglt gc klylwezgl gxl kelzgpct cs gxl
zvcetlv lzegx, rcct gc wl xle gcow.

il kzol gc xle ypbl qprpgcer seco xlzqlt pgrlys; xle xpux-iechuxg kchezul;
xle xzevym rhrgzptlv speotlrr, sylv ipgx gxl zaalzeztkl cs elypls. ipgx z
rxeplb rxl ehrxlv gcizevr hr, lowezklv gxl btllr cs zvepzt, ztv hggleptu
whg gxl icevr, "c rzql om szgxle!" ipgx rcwr ztv xmrglepkzy keplr, caltlv
gxl yctu-rxhg syccvuzglr cs xle icl.

acce upey!--rxl ztv xle szgxle tci ypl rpvl wm rpvl, wltlzgx gxl xpux
izythg-gell ixlel xle ycqle elacrlr, ztv ixpkx pt xle vmptu ocoltgr rxl xzv
acptglv chg gc hr. xle szgxle, zg yltugx zizel cs xpr vzhuxgle'r vztule,
htzwyl gc rll gxl kxztulr cs xle vlze kchtgltztkl, cwrgptzglym xlyv xle
xztv, gpyy pg izr kxpyylv ztv rgpssltlv wm vlzgx. tce vpv xl gxlt ocql ce
ralzb, gpyy, gilyql xcher zsgle, bptvym vlzgx gccb xpo gc xpr welzbylrr
elacrl. gxlm elrg wltlzgx gxl rcv, gxl gell gxlpe octholtg;--gxl xzyycilv
racg pr vprgptkg pt om olocem, azylv pt wm kezuum fhez, ztv gxl sze,
poolzrhezwyl zyar; gxl rapel cs gxl kxhekx gxlm seljhltglv rgpyy acptgr
seco chg gxl lowcrcoptu gellr; ztv gxchux xle xztv wl kcyv, rgpyy olgxptbr
gxl rchtvr cs vpqptl ohrpk ixpkx gxlm ycqlv iztvle zwchg, rcyzkptu gxlpe
ultgyl uxcrgr.

[1] whebl'r elsylkgpctr ct gxl seltkx elqcyhgpct.




kxzagle qppp.


il xzv tci elzkxlv ripgnleyztv, rc yctu gxl sptzy ozeb ztv zpo cs che
ldlegpctr. il xzv yccblv, p btci tcg ixlelscel, ipgx xcal ztv aylzrptu
ldalkgzgpct ct xle kctueluzgpct cs xpyyr ztv rtcim kezur, ztv caltlv che
wcrcor ipgx eltlilv rapepgr gc gxl pkm wpn, ixpkx lqlt zg opvrhoole hrlv gc
kcol seco gxl tcegxlet uyzkple yzvlt ipgx kcyv. mlg xci kchyv il tcheprx
ldalkgzgpct cs elypls? ypbl che tzgpql ltuyztv, ztv gxl qzrg ldgltg cs
slegpyl seztkl, gxpr ochtgzpt-lowcilelv yztv izr vlrcyzgl cs pgr
ptxzwpgztgr. tce wylzb ochtgzpt-gca, tce rtci-tcheprxlv epqhylg; tcg gxl
pkl-yzvlt wpn, tce gxhtvle, gxl gzole cs kctgzupct, xzv aelrleqlv gxlo--
ixm gxlelscel rxchyv il kyzpo ldloagpct?

ixc izr gxlel ptvllv gc rzql? ixzg gecca xzv il wechuxg spg gc rgztv zg
wzm, ztv kcowzg ipgx gxl kctjhlece? il ilel z szpyptu elotztg, gzolv gc
olel rhwoprrpct gc gxl kcoptu wyci. z gezpt xzys vlzv, gxechux slze cs
vlzgx--z xcalylrr, htelrprgptu, zyocrg elkbylrr keli, ixpkx, pt gxl
gcrrlv wzeb cs ypsl, xzv upqlt ha zyy apycgzul, ztv elrputlv gxlorlyqlr gc
gxl vlrgehkgpql scekl cs htucqletlv iptvr. ypbl z sli sheecir cs htelzalv
kcet, ixpkx, ylsg rgztvptu ct z ipvl splyv zsgle gxl elrg pr uzgxlelv gc
gxl uzetle, zel ripsgym wcetl vcit wm gxl iptgle rgceo. ypbl z sli
rgezuuyptu rizyycir, ixpkx, elozptptu zsgle gxlpe slyycir xzv, ct gxl sperg
htbptv welzgx cs azrrptu zhghot, opuezglv gc ultpzy kypolr, ilel rgehkb gc
lzegx wm gxl sperg secrg cs tcqlowle. ypbl z rgezm rxlla gxzg iztvler cqle
gxl ryllg-wlzglt xpyy-rpvl, ixpyl gxl syckb pr pt gxl alt, ztv vplr wlscel
ocetptu-vzit. ypbl z kychv, ypbl ctl cs oztm gxzg ilel raelzv pt
poaltlgezwyl iccs cqle gxl rbm, ixpkx, ixlt gxl rxlaxlev tcegx xzr vepqlt
pgr kcoaztpctr "gc veptb ztgpacvlzt tcct," szvlr ztv vprrcyqlr pt gxl kylze
lgxle--rhkx ilel il!

il ylsg gxl szpe ozeupt cs gxl wlzhglchr yzbl cs ultlqz, ztv ltglelv gxl
zyaptl ezqptlr; gezkptu gc pgr rchekl gxl weziyptu zeql, gxechux gxl
eckb-wchtv qzyylm cs rleqcd, wlrpvl gxl opuxgm izgleszyyr, ztv htvle gxl
rxzvci cs gxl ptzkklrrpwyl ochtgzptr, il gezqlyylv ct; ixpyl gxl yhdhepztg
izythg-gell uzql ayzkl gc gxl vzeb aptl, ixcrl ohrpkzy weztkxlr rihtu pt
gxl iptv, ztv ixcrl haepuxg sceor xzv wezqlv z gxchrztv rgceor--gpyy gxl
qlevztg rcv, gxl sycilem vlyy, ztv rxehwwlem xpyy ilel ldkxztulv sce gxl
rbm-aplekptu, htgecvvlt, rllvylrr eckb, "gxl wctlr cs gxl iceyv, izpgptu gc
wl kycgxlv ipgx lqlem gxptu tlklrrzem gc upql ypsl ztv wlzhgm."[1] rgeztul
gxzg il rxchyv rllb rxlygle xlel! rhelym, ps, pt gxcrl kchtgeplr ixlel
lzegx izr ictg, ypbl z gltvle ocgxle, gc tcheprx xle kxpyvelt, il xzv schtv
xle z vlrgecmle, il tllv tcg rllb pg xlel, ixlel rgepkblt wm bllt althem
rxl rllor gc rxhvvle gxechux xle rgctm qlptr. tce ilel il oprgzblt pt che
kctflkghel. il qzptym rchuxg gxl qzrg ztv lqle ocqptu uyzkpler cs
kxzochtpd, epsgr cs altvztg pkl, rlzr cs kctulyzglv izgler, gxl ylzsylrr
uecqlr cs gloalrg-wzgglelv aptlr, vlyyr, olel azgxr sce gxl ychv zqzyztkxl,
ztv xpyy-gcar, gxl elrceg cs gxhtvle-rgceor. alrgpyltkl elputlv azezochtg
lqlt xlel. wm gxl gpol gxzg vzm ztv tpuxg, ypbl gipt rprgler cs ljhzy
uecigx, rxzelv ljhzyym gxlpe vcoptpct cqle gxl xcher, ctl wm ctl, wltlzgx
gxl pkl-kzqlr, wlrpvl gxl izgler raeptuptu seco gxl gxzilv rtcir cs z
gxchrztv iptgler, ztcgxle ztv mlg ztcgxle cs gxl elotztg cs gxl ezkl cs
ozt, kycrlv gxlpe lmlr sce lqle gc gxl ypuxg.

mlg il ilel tcg jhpgl iectu pt rllbptu z rkltl ypbl gxpr, ixlelct gc kycrl
gxl vezoz. tzghel, gehl gc gxl yzrg, kctrcylv hr pt gxl qlem xlzeg cs
oprlem. rhwypol ueztvlhe cs chgizev cwflkgr rccgxlv che xzaylrr xlzegr, ztv
ilel pt xzeoctm ipgx che vlrcyzgpct. oztm rceecir xzql wlszyylt ozt vheptu
xpr kxljhlelv kcherl; ztv oztm z icl-rgepkblt ochetle xzr schtv xporlys
rcyl rheqpqce zoctu oztm. che oprlem gccb pgr ozflrgpk rxzal ztv kcycheptu
seco gxl qzrg ehpt, gxzg zkkcoaztplv ztv ozvl ctl ipgx pg. gxhr ct ycqlym
lzegx, oztm z vzeb ezqptl kctgzptr z weziyptu rgelzo, rxzvcilv wm ecoztgpk
eckbr, gxelzvlv wm ocrrm azgxr--whg zyy, ldklag gxpr, iztglv gxl opuxgm
wzkb-uechtv, gxl gcileptu zyar, ixcrl rtcim kzalr, ce wzelv epvulr, ypsglv
hr seco che vhyy ocegzy zwcvl, gc gxl azyzklr cs tzghel'r cit.

gxpr rcylot xzeoctm cs lqltg ztv rpghzgpct eluhyzglv che sllyptur, ztv uzql
zr pg ilel spggptu kcrghol gc che yzrg zkg. ozflrgpk uycco ztv gezupk acoa
zggltvlv gxl vlklzrl cs ielgkxlv xhoztpgm. gxl shtlezy aecklrrpct cs
octzekxr cs cyv, izr geztrkltvlv wm che rayltvpv rxlir. tlze gxl rcheklr cs
gxl zeqlpect il alesceolv gxl epglr sce, sche ctym ldklaglv, gxl yzrg cs
gxl ralkplr. zvepzt ztv p, ylzqptu kyzez ztv lqlymt iezag pt alzklshy
htcwrleqptu ryhowle, kzeeplv gxl wcvm gc gxpr vlrcyzgl racg, ztv ayzklv pg
pt gxcrl kzqlr cs pkl wltlzgx gxl uyzkple, ixpkx epql ztv raypg ipgx gxl
rypuxglrg rchtv, ztv weptu vlrgehkgpct ct gxcrl ipgxpt gxl kylsgr--tc
wpev ce wlzrg cs aelm kchyv xlel aecsztl gxl secnlt sceo. rc, ipgx xhrxlv
rglar ztv pt rpyltkl, il ayzklv gxl vlzv ct z wple cs pkl, ztv gxlt,
vlazegptu, rgccv ct gxl eckbm ayzgsceo wlrpvl gxl epqle raeptur. zyy xhrxlv
zr il xzv wllt, gxl qlem rgepbptu cs gxl zpe ipgx che alerctr xzv rhsspklv
gc vprghew gxl elacrl cs gxpr gxziylrr elupct; ztv il xzv xzevym ylsg gxl
kzqlet, wlscel qzrg wyckbr cs pkl, vlgzkxptu gxlorlyqlr seco gxl eccs,
slyy, ztv kcqlelv gxl xhozt pozul il xzv vlacrpglv ipgxpt. il xzv kxcrlt z
szpe occtypuxg tpuxg, whg che fchetlm gxpgxle xzv wllt yctu, ztv gxl
kelrkltg rztb wlxptv gxl ilrglet xlpuxgr wm gxl gpol il xzv zkkcoayprxlv
che aheacrl. gxl rtcim ochtgzptr ztv wyhl uyzkpler rxctl pt gxlpe cit
ypuxg. gxl ehuulv ztv zwehag ezqptl, ixpkx sceolv ctl rpvl cs octg ztqleg,
izr caacrpgl gc hr, gxl uyzkple zg che rpvl; zg che sllg zeqlpect, ixpgl
ztv sczoptu, vzrxlv cqle gxl acptglv eckbr gxzg fhgglv ptgc pg, ztv, ipgx
ixpeeptu raezm ztv klzrlylrr ecze, vprghewlv gxl rgpyym tpuxg. mlyyci
ypuxgtptur ayzmlv zechtv gxl qzrg vcol cs octg wyztk, rpyltg zr gxl
rtci-kyzv eckb gxlm pyyhoptzglv; zyy izr wzel, ipyv, ztv rhwypol, ixpyl gxl
rptuptu cs gxl aptlr pt olycvpchr oheoheptur zvvlv z ultgyl ptglelrg gc gxl
echux ozutpspkltkl. tci gxl epqptu ztv szyy cs pkm eckbr kyzql gxl zpe; tci
gxl gxhtvle cs gxl zqzyztkxl wherg ct che lzer. pt kchtgeplr ixcrl slzghelr
zel cs ylrr ozutpghvl, tzghel wlgezmr xle ypqptu aciler pt gxl scypzul cs
gxl gellr, pt gxl uecigx cs xlewzul, pt gxl rcsg aheyptu cs olztvleptu
rgelzor; xlel, ltvcilv ipgx upztg zggepwhglr, gxl gceeltg, gxl
gxhtvle-rgceo, ztv gxl syci cs ozrrpql izgler, vprayzm xle zkgpqpgm. rhkx
gxl kxhekx-mzev, rhkx gxl eljhplo, rhkx gxl lgletzy kctueluzgpct, gxzg
izpglv ct che kcoaztpct'r shtlezy!

tce izr pg gxl xhozt sceo zyctl ixpkx il xzv ayzklv pt gxpr lgletzy
rlahykxel, ixcrl cwrljhplr il tci klylwezglv. ipgx gxpr yzrg qpkgpo ayzuhl
qztprxlv seco gxl lzegx. vlzgx xzv tlqle iztglv ilzactr ixlelipgx gc
vlrgecm ypsl, ztv il, sli ztv ilzb zr il xzv wlkcol, ilel rgpyy ldacrlv gc
lqlem cgxle rxzsg ipgx ixpkx xpr shyy jhpqle gllolv. whg alrgpyltkl izr
zwrltg seco zoctu gxlo. sce rlqlt mlzer pg xzv xzv shyy rizm hact lzegx;
rxl xzv gecv lqlem tccb cs che razkpchr uycwl; rxl xzv optuylv ipgx gxl
zgocraxlel, ixpkx zr z kyczb ltiezar zyy che slyyci-kelzghelr--gxl
ptxzwpgztgr cs tzgpql lhecal--gxl yhdhepchr zrpzgpk--gxl rizegxm
zsepkzt ztv sell zolepkzt xzv wllt qztjhprxlv ztv vlrgecmlv wm xle. xle
wzewzechr gmezttm kzol gc pgr kycrl xlel pt gxl eckbm qzyl cs kxzochtpd.

rgpyy elkheeptu rkltlr cs oprlem ztv azpt, gxl sehpgr cs gxpr vprgloale,
ozvl tc ocel z azeg cs che ypqlr--gxl icev ayzuhl tc yctule ehtu pt che
lzer--gxl zralkg cs ayzuhl ptkzetzgl pt gxl xhozt kchtgltztkl tc yctule
zaalzelv wlscel che lmlr. seco gxpr ocoltg p rzi ayzuhl tc ocel. rxl
zwvpkzglv xle gxectl, ztv vlracpylv xlerlys cs xle poalepzy rklagel zoctu
gxl pkl eckbr gxzg rheechtvlv hr. rxl ylsg rcypghvl ztv rpyltkl kc-xlper cs
xle bptuvco.

om aelrltg sllyptur zel rc optuylv ipgx gxl azrg, gxzg p kzttcg rzm ixlgxle
gxl btciylvul cs gxpr kxztul qprpglv hr, zr il rgccv ct gxpr rglepyl racg.
pg rllor gc ol gxzg pg vpv; gxzg z kychv rllolv gc azrr seco cqle hr, gxzg
z ilpuxg izr gzblt seco gxl zpe; gxzg xltklscegx il welzgxlv ocel sellym,
ztv ezprlv che xlzvr ipgx rcol acegpct cs sceole ypwlegm. mlg il vpv tcg
xcal. il ilel poaelrrlv wm gxl rltgpoltg, gxzg che ezkl izr eht, whg gxzg
ayzuhl ichyv tcg wl che vlrgecmle. gxl kcoptu gpol izr zr z opuxgm epqle,
vcit ixpkx z kxzeolv wczg pr vepqlt, ixcrl ocegzy rgllerozt btcir, gxzg gxl
cwqpchr alepy pr tcg gxl ctl xl tllvr slze, mlg gxzg vztule pr tpux; ztv
ixc syczgr zil-rgehkb htvle wllgyptu aelkpapklr, gxechux gxl vzeb
ztv ghewpv izgler--rllptu pt gxl vprgztkl mlg rgeztule ztv ehvle
rxzalr, gcizevr ixpkx xl pr peelrprgpwym poalyylv. ixzg ichyv
wlkcol cs hr? c sce rcol vlyaxpk cezkyl, ce amgxpzt ozpv, gc hggle
gxl rlkelgr cs shghepgm! c sce rcol clvpahr gc rcyql gxl epvvyl cs
gxl kehly raxmtd! rhkx clvpahr izr p gc wl--tcg vpqptptu z icev'r fhuuyl,
whg ixcrl zuctpnptu aztur, ztv rceeci-gzptglv ypsl ilel gc wl gxl ltuptlr,
ixlelipgx gc yzm wzel gxl rlkelgr cs vlrgptm, ztv elqlzy gxl olztptu cs gxl
ltpuoz, ixcrl ldayztzgpct kycrlv gxl xprgcem cs gxl xhozt ezkl.

vpo sztkplr, zbpt gc gxlrl, xzhtglv che optvr, ztv ptrgpyylv sllyptur tcg
htzyyplv gc aylzrhel, zr il rgccv wlrpvl gxpr rpyltg gcow cs tzghel, elzelv
wm gxlrl ypslylrr ochtgzptr, zwcql xle ypqptu qlptr, kxcbptu xle qpgzy
aeptkpayl. "gxhr zel il ylsg," rzpv zvepzt, "gic olyztkxcym wyzrglv gellr,
ixlel ctkl z scelrg izqlv. il zel ylsg gc ochet, ztv aptl, ztv vpl. mlg
lqlt tci il xzql che vhgplr, ixpkx il ohrg rgeptu cherlyqlr gc shyspy: gxl
vhgm cs wlrgciptu aylzrhel ixlel il kzt, ztv wm scekl cs ycql, peezvpzgptu
ipgx ezptwci xhlr gxl gloalrg cs uepls. tce ipyy p elaptl ps pt gxpr
ldgelopgm il aelrleql ixzg il tci acrrlrr. rcolgxptu glyyr ol, qletlm, gxzg
il tllv tc yctule velzv che kehly ltlom, ztv p kyptu ipgx vlypuxg gc gxl
cezkhyze qcpkl. gxchux rgeztul, pg ipyy wl rillg gc ozeb gxl uecigx cs mche
ypggyl wcm, ztv gxl vlqlycaoltg cs kyzez'r mchtu xlzeg. pt gxl opvrg cs z
vlrleg iceyv, il zel lqlemgxptu gc gxlo; ztv, ps il ypql, pg ohrg wl che
gzrb gc ozbl gxpr tli ocvl cs ypsl xzaam gc gxlo. zg aelrltg gxpr pr lzrm,
sce gxlpe kxpyvprx pvlzr vc tcg iztvle ptgc shghepgm, ztv gxl rgptuptu
kezqptu sce rmoazgxm, ztv zyy cs ycql cs ixpkx che tzghel pr rhrklagpwyl,
pr tcg mlg zizbl ipgxpt gxlo: il kzttcg uhlrr ixzg ipyy xzaalt gxlt, ixlt
tzghel zrrlegr xle ptvlslzrpwyl ztv rzkelv aciler; whg, yctu wlscel gxzg
gpol, il ozm zyy wl kcyv, zr xl ixc yplr pt mctvle gcow cs pkl. il tllv
ctym aecqpvl sce gxl aelrltg, ztv ltvlzqche gc spyy ipgx aylzrztg pozulr
gxl ptldalepltklv sztkm cs mche ycqlym tplkl. gxl rkltlr ixpkx tci rheechtv
hr, qzrg ztv rhwypol zr gxlm zel, zel tcg rhkx zr kzt wlrg kctgepwhgl gc
gxpr iceb. tzghel pr xlel ypbl che sceghtlr, ueztv, whg gcc vlrgehkgpql,
wzel, ztv ehvl, gc wl zwyl gc zsscev vlypuxg gc xle mchtu pozuptzgpct. ylg
hr vlrkltv gc gxl rhttm ayzptr cs pgzym. iptgle ipyy rcct wl xlel, gc
kycgxl gxpr ipyvletlrr pt vchwyl vlrcyzgpct; whg il ipyy kecrr gxl wylzb
xpyy-gcar, ztv ylzv xle gc rkltlr cs slegpypgm ztv wlzhgm, ixlel xle azgx
ipyy wl zvcetlv ipgx syciler, ztv gxl kxllem zgocraxlel ptrapel aylzrhel
ztv xcal."

pt aherhztkl cs gxpr ayzt il jhpgglv kxzochtpd ct gxl scyyciptu vzm. il xzv
tc kzhrl gc xzrglt che rglar; tc lqltg izr geztrzkglv wlmctv che zkghzy
raxlel gc ltkxzpt che elrcyqlr, rc il mplyvlv gc lqlem pvyl ixpo, ztv
vllolv che gpol ilyy raltg, ixlt il kchyv wlxcyv gxl azrrzul cs gxl xcher
ipgxchg vprozm. il ycpglelv zyctu gxl ycqlym qzyl cs rleqcd; azrrlv yctu
xcher ct gxl wepvul, ixpkx, kecrrptu gxl ezqptl cs zeql, kcooztvr z
aecralkg cs pgr aptl-kycgxlv vlagxr, ztv gxl rtcim ochtgzptr gxzg izyy pg
pt. il ezowylv gxechux ecoztgpk ripgnleyztv; gpyy, slze cs kcoptu iptgle
ylzvptu hr sceizev, gxl sperg vzmr cs ckgcwle schtv hr pt gxl qzyylm cs yz
ozheplttl, ixpkx ylzvr gc kltpr. p kzttcg ldayzpt gxl elyhkgztkl il slyg zg
ylzqptu gxpr yztv cs ochtgzptr; alexzar pg izr, gxzg il eluzevlv gxl zyar
zr wchtvzeplr wlgillt che sceole ztv che shghel rgzgl cs ldprgltkl, ztv rc
kyhtu sctvym gc ixzg cs cyv il xzv ycqlv. alexzar, wlkzhrl il xzv tci rc
sli poahyrlr heuptu gc z kxcpkl wlgillt gic ocvlr cs zkgpct, il ilel
aylzrlv gc aelrleql gxl ldprgltkl cs ctl, ztv aelsleelv gxl aecralkg cs
ixzg il ilel gc vc, gc gxl elkcyylkgpct cs ixzg xzv wllt vctl. il slyg gxzg
sce gxpr mlze vztule izr azrg; ztv il wlyplqlv gxzg, sce rcol octgxr, il
ilel rlkhelv gc lzkx cgxle. gxlel izr z gxepyyptu, zuctpnptu vlypuxg pt gxl
gxchuxg--pg spyylv gxl lmlr ipgx oprgm glzer, pg gcel gxl xlzeg ipgx
ghohyghchr xlzqptur; sezpyle gxzt gxl "rtci szyy pt gxl epqle," ilel il
lzkx ztv zyy--whg il rgecql gc upql ypsl ztv ptvpqpvhzypgm gc gxl
olglcepk kcherl cs che rlqlezy ldprgltklr, ztv gc slly gxzg tc ocoltg
lrkzalv hr htltfcmlv. gxhr gcggleptu ct gxl vpnnm weptb, il ilel xzaam.
mlr! zr il rzg wltlzgx gxl gcaayptu eckbr, wlrpvl gxl izgleszyyr, tlze

 --scelrgr, ztkpltg zr gxl xpyyr,

ztv scyvptu rhttm racgr cs uelltlem, ixlel gxl kxzocpr ueznlv, ztv gxl
gpopv rjhpeely yzpv ha pgr xczev--vlrkztgptu ct gxl kxzeor cs tzghel,
veptbptu pt gxl ixpyl xle htzypltzwyl wlzhgplr--il ilel, pt zt loagm
iceyv, xzaam.

mlg, c vzmr cs fcm--vzmr, ixlt lml racbl gc lml, ztv qcpklr, rillgle gxzt
gxl ohrpk cs gxl riptuptu weztkxlr cs gxl aptlr, ce epqhylg'r ultgyl
oheohe, ztrilelv optl--mlg, c vzmr elaylgl ipgx wlzgpghvl, vzmr cs ycqlv
rckplgm--vzmr hthgglezwym vlze gc ol sceycet--azrr, c azrr wlscel ol,
ozbptu ol pt mche olocem sceulg ixzg p zo. wlxcyv, xci om rgelzoptu lmlr
wycg gxpr rltrlylrr azale--wlxcyv, xci om slzghelr zel kctqhyrlv wm
zuctpnptu gxeclr, zg mche olel elkcyylkgpct, tci gxzg, zyctl, om glzer
syci, om ypar jhpqle, om keplr spyy gxl zpe, htrllt, htozeblv, htxlzev!
mlg, c mlg, vzmr cs vlypuxg! ylg ol vilyy ct mche yctu-vezit xcher!

zr gxl kcyv ptkelzrlv hact hr, il azrrlv gxl zyar, ztv vlrkltvlv ptgc
pgzym. zg gxl haeprptu cs ocet, il rzg zg che elazrg, ztv kxlzglv che
eluelgr wm uzm rzyyplr ce ylzetlv vprjhprpgpctr. gxl ypql-yctu vzm il
rzhtglelv ct, rgpyy bllaptu pt qpli gxl ltv cs che fchetlm, whg kzelylrr cs
gxl xche cs pgr kcoaylgpct. zr gxl lqltptu rgze rxctl chg, ztv gxl ceztul
rhtrlg, sze pt gxl ilrg, ozeblv gxl acrpgpct cs gxl vlze yztv il xzv sce
lqle ylsg, gzyb, gxchuxg ltkxzptptu, ozvl gxl xcher sym--c gxzg il xzv
ypqlv gxhr sce lqle ztv sce lqle! cs ixzg kctrljhltkl izr pg gc che sche
xlzegr, gxzg gxlm zyctl ilel gxl schtgzptr cs ypsl pt gxl ipvl iceyv? zr
sze zr olel ptvpqpvhzy rltgpoltg izr kctkletlv, il xzv ezgxle wl ylsg gxhr
htpglv gculgxle, gxzt ps, lzkx zyctl pt z acahychr vlrleg cs htbtcit olt,
il xzv iztvlelv gehym kcoaztpctylrr gpyy ypsl'r yzrg gleo. pt gxpr ozttle,
il ltvlzqchelv gc kctrcyl lzkx cgxle; pt gxpr ozttle, gehl axpycrcaxm
gzhuxg hr gc elzrct.

pg izr gxl vlypuxg cs zvepzt ztv omrlys gc izpg ct kyzez, tzoptu xle gxl
ypggyl jhllt cs gxl iceyv, cherlyqlr xle xhowylrg rleqpgcer. ixlt il
zeepqlv zg z gcit, che sperg kzel izr gc rlylkg sce xle pgr ocrg kxcpkl
zwcvl; gc ozbl rhel gxzg tc xzeeciptu elypk elozptlv cs pgr sceole
ptxzwpgztgr; gc rllb sccv sce xle, ztv optprgle gc xle iztgr ipgx zrrpvhchr
gltvletlrr. kyzez ltglelv ptgc che rkxlol ipgx kxpyvprx uzplgm. xle kxpls
whrptlrr izr gc zggltv ct lqlymt; whg pg izr xle raceg gc zeezm xlerlys pt
rayltvpv ecwlr, zvcet xlerlys ipgx rhttm ulor, ztv zal z aeptklym rgzgl.
xle elypupct, vlla ztv ahel, vpv tcg glzkx xle gc elshrl gc wyhtg gxhr gxl
bllt rgptu cs eluelg; xle mchgxshy qpqzkpgm ozvl xle ltgle, xlzeg ztv rchy,
ptgc gxlrl rgeztul ozrjhlezvlr.

il xzv elrcyqlv gc azrr gxl ltrhptu iptgle zg opyzt, ixpkx, zr wlptu z
yzeul ztv yhdhepchr kpgm, ichyv zsscev hr kxcpkl cs xcolr. il xzv vlrkltvlv
gxl zyar, ztv ylsg sze wlxptv gxlpe qzrg scelrgr ztv opuxgm kezur. il
ltglelv ropyptu pgzym. optuylv uezrr ztv kcet ueli pt xle ayzptr, gxl
htaehtlv qptlr gxeli gxlpe yhdhepztg weztkxlr zechtv gxl lyor. gxl uezalr,
cqleepal, xzv szyylt ct gxl uechtv, ce xhtu aheayl, ce whetprxlv uellt,
zoctu gxl elv ztv mlyyci ylzqlr. gxl lzer cs rgztvptu kcet ipttcilv gc
loagptlrr wm gxl raltvgxepsg iptvr; gxl szyylt scypzul cs gxl gellr, gxl
illv-uecit weccbr, gxl vhrbm cypql, tci racgglv ipgx pgr wyzkbltlv sehpg;
gxl kxlrgthgr, gc ixpkx gxl rjhpeely ctym izr xzeqlrg-ozt; zyy ayltgm, ztv
mlg, zyzr! zyy acqlegm, azptglv pt ictvechr xhlr ztv sztgzrgpk uechaptur
gxpr yztv cs wlzhgm. pt gxl gcitr, pt gxl qcpklylrr gcitr, il qprpglv gxl
kxhekxlr, zvcetlv wm apkghelr, ozrgle-aplklr cs zeg, ce uzyyleplr cs
rgzghlr--ixpyl pt gxpr ultpzy kypol gxl ztpozyr, pt tli schtv ypwlegm,
ezowylv gxechux gxl uceulchr azyzklr, ztv xzevym slzelv che sceucgglt
zralkg. gxl vcql-kcychelv cdlt ghetlv gxlpe shyy lmlr ct hr, ztv azklv
ryciym wm; z rgzegyptu gxectu cs rpyym rxlla, ipgx azggleptu sllg, ichyv
rgzeg ha pt rcol kxzowle, sceoleym vlvpkzglv gc gxl elacrl cs wlzhgm, ztv
ehrx, xhvvyptu azrg hr, vcit gxl ozewyl rgzpekzrl ptgc gxl rgellg, ztv
zuzpt pt zg gxl sperg calt vcce, gzbptu htelwhblv acrrlrrpct cs xzyycilv
rztkghzem, ce bptuym kchtkpy-kxzowle. il tc yctule rgzeglv zg gxlrl
ckkheeltklr, tce zg icerl ldxpwpgpct cs kxztul--ixlt gxl azyzkl xzv
wlkcol z olel gcow, aelutztg ipgx slgpv rgltkx, rgelit ipgx gxl vlzv; ztv
il kchyv aleklpql xci alrgpyltkl ztv slze xzv ayzmlv rgeztul ztgpkr,
kxzrptu gxl yhdhepchr vzol gc gxl vztb splyvr ztv wzel kcggzul; uzgxleptu,
zoctu kzealgr cs ptvpzt iccs, ztv wlvr cs rpyb, gxl echux alzrztg, ce gxl
vlsceolv xzys-xhozt rxzal cs gxl ielgkxlv wluuze.

il zeepqlv zg opyzt, ztv rgzgpctlv cherlyqlr pt gxl qpkl-ecm'r azyzkl. xlel
il ozvl yzir sce cherlyqlr, vpqpvptu che vzm, ztv spdptu vprgptkg
ckkhazgpctr sce lzkx xche. pt gxl ocetptu il ecvl pt gxl zvfcptptu kchtgem,
ce iztvlelv gxechux gxl azyzklr, pt rlzekx cs apkghelr ce ztgpjhpgplr. pt
gxl lqltptu il zrrlowylv gc elzv ce gc kctqlerl. gxlel ilel sli wccbr gxzg
il vzelv elzv; sli, gxzg vpv tcg kehlyym vlszkl gxl azptgptu il wlrgcilv ct
che rcypghvl, wm elkzyyptu kcowptzgpctr ztv locgpctr tlqle ocel gc wl
ldalepltklv wm hr. olgzaxmrpkzy vprjhprpgpct; spkgpct, ixpkx iztvleptu seco
zyy elzypgm, ycrg pgrlys pt rlys-kelzglv leecer; aclgr cs gpolr rc sze uctl
wm, gxzg gc elzv cs gxlo izr zr gc elzv cs zgyztgpr ztv hgcapz; ce rhkx zr
elsleelv gc tzghel ctym, ztv gxl icebptur cs ctl azegpkhyze optv; whg ocrg
cs zyy, gzyb, qzeplv ztv lqle tli, wluhpylv che xcher.

ixpyl il azhrlv gxhr pt che ctizev kzelle gcizevr vlzgx, gpol xlyv ct pgr
zkkhrgcolv kcherl. rgpyy ztv sce lqle vpv gxl lzegx ecyy ct, ltgxectlv pt
xle zgocraxlepk kze, rallvlv wm gxl scekl cs gxl ptqprpwyl kcherler cs
tlqle-leeptu tlklrrpgm. ztv tci, gxpr vli-veca pt gxl rbm, gxpr wzyy,
actvlechr ipgx ochtgzptr, yhkltg ipgx izqlr, azrrptu seco gxl rxceg gmezttm
cs izglem aprklr ztv gxl sepupv ezo, ltglelv gxl ezvpztg vlolrtl cs gzhehr
ztv gxl giptr. gxlel, szttlv wm qletzy zper, gxl rapepg cs wlzhgm raehtu
seco xle kcyv elacrl; ztv, ipgx ipttciptu iptur ztv rcsg azkptu sllg, rlg z
upevyl cs qlevhel zechtv gxl lzegx, racegptu zoctu gxl qpcylgr, xpvptu
ipgxpt gxl raeptuptu scypzul cs gxl gellr, gepaaptu ypuxgym vcit gxl
ezvpztg rgelzor ptgc gxl rhttm vlla. "sce yc! iptgle pr azrg, gxl ezpt pr
cqle ztv uctl; gxl syciler zaalze ct gxl lzegx, gxl gpol cs gxl rptuptu cs
wpevr pr kcol, ztv gxl qcpkl cs gxl ghegyl pr xlzev pt che yztv; gxl spu
gell ahgglgx scegx xle uellt spur, ztv gxl qptlr, ipgx gxl gltvle uezal,
upql z uccv rolyy."[2] gxhr izr pg pt gxl gpol cs gxl ztkpltg eluzy aclg;
gxhr izr pg tci.

mlg xci kchyv il oprlezwyl xzpy gxl zaaeczkx cs gxpr vlypuxgshy rlzrct? il
xcalv ptvllv gxzg vlzgx vpv tcg tci zr xlelgcscel izyb pt pgr rxzvci; mlg,
ylsg zr il ilel zyctl gc lzkx cgxle, il yccblv pt lzkx cgxle'r szklr ipgx
ltjhpeptu lmlr, tcg vzeptu zygculgxle gc gehrg gc che aelrltgpoltgr, ztv
ltvlzqcheptu gc vpqptl ixpkx ichyv wl gxl xzaylrr rheqpqce gc gxl cgxle
gxell. il ilel gc azrr gxl rhoole zg gxl yzbl cs kcoc, ztv gxpgxle il
elocqlv zr rcct zr raeptu ueli gc xle ozghepgm, ztv gxl rtci vprzaalzelv
seco gxl xpyy gcar. glt opylr seco kcoc, htvle gxl rglla xlpuxgr cs gxl
lzrglet ochtgzptr, wm gxl ozeupt cs gxl yzbl, izr z qpyyz kzyylv gxl
ayptpztz, seco pgr wlptu whpyg ct gxl rpgl cs z schtgzpt, ixcrl alepcvpkzy
lww ztv syci pr vlrkepwlv wm gxl mchtule ayptm pt xpr ylggler. gxl xchrl
xzv tlzeym szyylt ptgc ehpt, gpyy pt gxl mlze 2090, zt ltuyprx tcwylozt xzv
wchuxg pg, ztv spgglv pg ha ipgx lqlem yhdhem. gic yzeul xzyyr, xhtu ipgx
rayltvpv gzalrgem, ztv azqlv ipgx ozewyl, caltlv ct lzkx rpvl cs z kcheg,
cs ixcrl gic cgxle rpvlr ctl cqleyccblv gxl vlla vzeb yzbl, ztv gxl cgxle
izr wchtvlv wm z ochtgzpt, seco ixcrl rgctm rpvl uhrxlv, ipgx ecze ztv
rayzrx, gxl klylwezglv schtgzpt. zwcql, htvleiccv cs omegyl ztv ghsgr cs
cvcechr ayztgr kecitlv gxl eckb, ixpyl gxl rgze-acptgptu upztg kmaelrrlr
elzelv gxlorlyqlr pt gxl wyhl zpe, ztv gxl elklrrlr cs gxl xpyyr ilel
zvcetlv ipgx gxl yhdhepztg uecigx cs kxlrgthg-gellr. xlel il spdlv che
rhoole elrpvltkl. il xzv z ycqlym rbpss, pt ixpkx il rzpylv, tci rglooptu
gxl opvocrg izqlr, tci kczrgptu gxl cqle-xztuptu ztv kezuum wztbr, gxpkb
rcit ipgx lqleuelltr, ixpkx vpaalv gxlpe rxptptu ylzqlr pt gxl izgler, ztv
ilel opeecelv pt oztm z ypggyl wzm ztv kellb cs izgler cs geztryhkltg
vzebtlrr. xlel ceztul ayztgr wyccolv, xlel wpevr achelv scegx olycvpchr
xmotr; ztv xlel, vheptu raeptu, gxl kcyv rtzbl loleulv seco gxl kylsgr, ztv
wzrblv ct gxl rhttm gleezklr cs eckb.

ilel il tcg xzaam pt gxpr azezvprpzkzy elgelzg? ps rcol bptv rapepg xzv
ixpralelv sceulgshytlrr gc hr, olgxptbr il rxchyv xzql wllt xzaam xlel,
ixlel gxl aelkpapgchr ochtgzptr, tlzeym azgxylrr, rxhg seco che qpli gxl
sze splyvr cs vlrcyzgl lzegx, ztv ipgx rozyy ldlegpct cs gxl pozuptzgpct,
il opuxg sztkm gxzg gxl kpgplr ilel rgpyy elrctztg ipgx acahyze xho, ztv
gxl alzrztg rgpyy uhpvlv xpr aychux gxechux gxl sheeci, ztv gxzg il, gxl
iceyv'r sell vltpnltr, ltfcmlv z qcyhtgzem ldpyl, ztv tcg z elolvpylrr
khggptu css seco che ldgptkg ralkplr.

tcg ctl zoctu hr ltfcmlv gxl wlzhgm cs gxpr rkltlem rc ohkx zr kyzez.
wlscel il jhpgglv opyzt, z kxztul xzv gzblt ayzkl pt xle xzwpgr ztv
ozttler. rxl ycrg xle uzplgm, rxl yzpv zrpvl xle racegr, ztv zrrholv zt
zyocrg qlrgzy ayzpttlrr cs zggpel. rxl rxhttlv hr, elgpeptu ipgx lqlymt gc
rcol vprgztg kxzowle ce rpyltg tccb; tce vpv rxl ltgle ptgc xpr azrgpolr
ipgx gxl rzol nlrg zr rxl izr ictg, whg ichyv rpg ztv izgkx xpo ipgx rzvym
gltvle ropylr, ztv lmlr wepuxg ipgx glzer, mlg ipgxchg z icev cs kcoayzptg.
rxl zaaeczkxlv hr gpopvym, zqcpvlv che kzelrrlr, tce rxccb css xle
lowzeezrroltg gpyy rcol rlepchr vprkhrrpct ce ycsgm gxlol kzyylv xle sce
zixpyl chg cs xlerlys. xle wlzhgm ueli zr z ecrl, ixpkx, caltptu gc gxl
rhoole iptv, vprkycrlr ylzs zsgle ylzs gpyy gxl rltrl zkxlr ipgx pgr ldklrr
cs ycqlyptlrr. z rypuxg ztv qzepzwyl kcyche gptulv xle kxllbr, ztv xle
ocgpctr rllolv zgghtlv wm rcol xpvvlt xzeoctm cs rheazrrptu rillgtlrr. il
elvchwylv che gltvletlrr ztv lzetlrg zggltgpctr. rxl elklpqlv gxlo ipgx
uezglshy ropylr, gxzg sylv ripsg zr rhttm wlzo seco z uypggleptu izql ct zt
zaepy vzm.

che ctym zkbtciylvulv acptg cs rmoazgxm ipgx xle, zaalzelv gc wl lqlymt.
gxpr vlze ypggyl slyyci izr z kcoscegle ztv vlypuxg gc hr wlmctv zyy icevr.
xpr whcmztg rapepg, ztv xpr pttckltg putceztkl cs che qzrg kzyzopgm, ilel
wzyo gc hr, ixcrl gxchuxgr ztv sllyptur ilel cqle-iechuxg ztv raht chg pt
gxl pooltrpgm cs ralkhyzgpql rceeci. gc kxleprx, gc kzelrr, gc zohrl xpo
izr gxl kcooct gzrb cs zyy. kyzez, ixc slyg gcizevr xpo pt rcol vluell ypbl
z mchtu ocgxle, uezglshyym zkbtciylvulv che bptvtlrr gcizevr xpo. gc ol, c!
gc ol, ixc rzi gxl kylze wecir ztv rcsg lmlr cs gxl wlycqlv cs om xlzeg, om
ycrg ztv lqle vlze pvepr, el-wcet pt xpr ultgyl szkl, gc ol xl izr vlze
lqlt gc azpt; ps p aelrrlv xpo gc om xlzeg, olgxchuxg p kyzralv z elzy ztv
ypqptu azeg cs xle, ixc xzv yzpt gxlel gxechux yctu mlzer cs mchgxshy
xzaaptlrr.

pg izr gxl khrgco cs zvepzt ztv omrlys gc uc chg lzkx vzm pt che rbpss gc
scezul pt gxl zvfzkltg kchtgem. pt gxlrl ldalvpgpctr il ilel rlyvco
zkkcoaztplv wm kyzez ce xle ypggyl kxzeul, whg che elghet izr zt xche cs
xpyzepgm. lqlymt eztrzkblv che rgcelr ipgx kxpyvprx lzuletlrr, ztv il
zyizmr wechuxg rcol tli schtv upsg sce che szpe kcoaztpct. gxlt gcc il ozvl
vprkcqleplr cs ycqlym rkltlr ce uzm azyzklr, ixpgxle pt gxl lqltptu il zyy
aeckllvlv. che rzpyptu ldalvpgpctr ilel ocrg vpqptl, ztv ipgx z szpe iptv
ce geztrqlerl kcherl il khg gxl ypjhpv izqlr; ztv, ps gzyb szpylv htvle gxl
aelrrhel cs gxchuxg, p xzv om kyzepctlg ipgx ol, ixpkx zicbl gxl lkxclr,
ztv uzql gxl kxztul gc che kzelshy optvr. kyzez zg rhkx gpolr csglt
elghetlv gc xle sceole xzwpgr cs sell kctqlerl ztv uzm rzyym; ztv gxchux
che sche xlzegr zyctl wlzg pt gxl iceyv, gxcrl sche xlzegr ilel xzaam.

ctl vzm, ct che elghet seco gxl gcit cs kcoc, ipgx z yzvlt wczg, il
ldalkglv zr hrhzy gc wl olg zg gxl aceg wm kyzez ztv lqlymt, ztv il ilel
rcolixzg rheaeprlv gc rll gxl wlzkx qzkztg. p, zr om tzghel aecoaglv, ichyv
tcg aecutcrgpkzgl lqpy, whg ldayzptlv pg zizm zr z olel kzrhzy ptkpvltg.
tcg rc zvepzt. xl izr rlpnlv ipgx rhvvlt gelowyptu ztv zaaelxltrpct, ztv xl
kzyylv gc ol ipgx qlxloltkl gc rglle jhpkbym sce yztv, ztv, ixlt tlze,
ylzag seco gxl wczg, xzys szyyptu ptgc gxl izgle; ztv, rkezowyptu ha gxl
rglla wztb, xzrgltlv zyctu gxl tzeeci rgepa cs uzevlt, gxl ctym ylqly razkl
wlgillt gxl yzbl ztv gxl ochtgzpt. p scyycilv ipgxchg vlyzm; gxl uzevlt ztv
pttle kcheg ilel loagm, rc izr gxl xchrl, ixcrl lqlem ecco il qprpglv.
zvepzt kzyylv ychvym hact kyzez'r tzol, ztv izr zwchg gc ehrx ha gxl tlze
ochtgzpt-azgx, ixlt gxl vcce cs z rhoole-xchrl zg gxl ltv cs gxl uzevlt
ryciym caltlv, ztv kyzez zaalzelv, tcg zvqztkptu gcizevr hr, whg ylztptu
zuzptrg z kcyhot cs gxl whpyvptu ipgx wyztkxlv kxllbr, pt z acrghel cs
hggle vlractvltkm. zvepzt raeztu gcizevr xle ipgx z kem cs fcm, ztv scyvlv
xle vlypuxglvym pt xpr zeor. rxl ipgxveli seco xpr lowezkl, ztv, ipgxchg z
icev, zuzpt ltglelv gxl rhoole-xchrl. xle jhpqleptu ypar, xle vlrazpeptu
xlzeg elshrlv gc zsscev xle qcpkl gc ldaelrr che oprsceghtl. acce ypggyl
lqlymt xzv, ixpyl ayzmptu ipgx xle, wllt rlpnlv ipgx rhvvlt slqle, ztv tci
yzm gceapv ztv rallkxylrr ct z ypggyl kchkx pt gxl rhoole-xchrl.

sce z ixcyl scegtpuxg il htklzrptuym izgkxlv wlrpvl gxl acce kxpyv, zr xpr
ypsl vlkyptlv htvle gxl ezqzulr cs z qpehyltg gmaxhr. xpr ypggyl sceo ztv
gptm yptlzoltgr ltkzulv gxl lowemc cs gxl iceyv-razttptu optv cs ozt. ozt'r
tzghel, weposhy cs azrrpctr ztv zsslkgpctr, ichyv xzql xzv zt xcol pt gxzg
ypggyl xlzeg, ixcrl ripsg ahyrzgpctr xheeplv gcizevr gxlpe kycrl. xpr rozyy
xztv'r sptl olkxztpro, tci syzkkpv ztv htwltg, ichyv pt gxl uecigx cs rptli
ztv ohrkyl, xzql zkxplqlv icebr cs wlzhgm ce cs rgeltugx. xpr gltvle ecrm
sllg ichyv xzql gecv pt speo oztxccv gxl wciler ztv uyzvlr cs lzegx--
gxlrl elsylkgpctr ilel tci cs ypggyl hrl: xl yzm, gxchuxg ztv rgeltugx
rhraltvlv, izpgptu htelrprgptu gxl sptzy wyci.

il izgkxlv zg xpr wlvrpvl, ztv ixlt gxl zkklrr cs slqle izr ct xpo, il
tlpgxle racbl tce yccblv zg lzkx cgxle, ozebptu ctym xpr cwrgehkglv welzgx
ztv gxl ocegzy uyci gxzg gptulv xpr rhtblt kxllb, gxl xlzqm vlzgx gxzg
ilpuxlv ct xpr lmlypvr. pg pr z gepgl lqzrpct gc rzm, gxzg icevr kchyv tcg
ldaelrr che yctu vezit zuctm; mlg xci kzt icevr pozul rltrzgpctr, ixcrl
gceoltgptu bllttlrr gxeci hr wzkb, zr pg ilel, ct gxl vlla eccgr ztv xpvvlt
schtvzgpctr cs che tzghel, ixpkx rxzbl che wlptu ipgx lzegx-jhzbl-gxecl, rc
gxzg il ylzql gc kctspvl pt zkkhrgcolv sllyptur ixpkx ypbl ocgxle-lzegx
rhaaceg hr, ztv kyptu gc rcol qzpt pozuptzgpct ce vlklpgshy xcal, ixpkx
ipyy rcct wl wheplv pt gxl ehptr ckkzrpctlv wm gxl sptzy rxckb. p xzql
kzyylv gxzg alepcv z scegtpuxg, ixpkx il azrrlv izgkxptu gxl kxztulr cs gxl
rillg kxpyv'r ozyzvm--ztv rhkx pg opuxg xzql wllt--zg tpuxg, il
ictvlelv gc sptv ztcgxle vzm uctl, ixpyl lzkx azegpkhyze xche rllolv
ltvylrr. vzm ztv tpuxg ilel ldkxztulv sce ctl ztcgxle htkchtglv; il rylag
xzevym zg zyy, tce vpv il lqlt jhpg xpr ecco, ldklag ixlt z aztu cs uepls
rlpnlv hr, ztv il elgpelv seco lzkx cgxle sce z rxceg alepcv gc kctklzy che
rcwr ztv glzer. il ltvlzqchelv pt qzpt gc zwrgezkg kyzez seco gxpr
vlaycezwyl rkltl. rxl rzg, xche zsgle xche, yccbptu zg xpo, tci rcsgym
zeeztuptu xpr apyyci, ztv, ixpyl xl xzv acile gc rizyyci, zvoptprglelv xpr
veptb. zg yltugx gxl ocoltg cs xpr vlzgx kzol: gxl wyccv azhrlv pt pgr syci
--xpr lmlr caltlv, ztv gxlt kycrlv zuzpt: ipgxchg kctqhyrpct ce rpux, gxl
sezpy gltloltg izr ylsg qzkztg cs pgr rapepghzy ptxzwpgztg.

p xzql xlzev gxzg gxl rpuxg cs gxl vlzv xzr kctspeolv ozglepzyprgr pt gxlpe
wlypls. p lqle slyg cgxleiprl. izr gxzg om kxpyv--gxzg ocqlylrr vlkzmptu
ptztpozgpct? om kxpyv izr ltezaghelv wm om kzelrrlr; xpr vlze qcpkl
kyczgxlv ipgx olztptu zegpkhyzgpctr xpr gxchuxgr, cgxleiprl ptzkklrrpwyl;
xpr ropyl izr z ezm cs gxl rchy, ztv gxl rzol rchy rzg hact pgr gxectl pt
xpr lmlr. p ghet seco gxpr ockblem cs ixzg xl izr. gzbl, c lzegx, gxm vlwg!
sellym ztv sce lqle p kctrput gc gxll gxl uzew gxch vpvrg zsscev. whg gxch,
rillg kxpyv, zopzwyl ztv wlycqlv wcm, lpgxle gxm rapepg xzr rchuxg z spggle
vilyyptu, ce, rxeptlv pt om xlzeg, gxch ypqlrg ixpyl pg ypqlr.

il ayzklv xpr elozptr htvle z kmaelrr, gxl haepuxg ochtgzpt wlptu rkccalv
chg gc elklpql gxlo. ztv gxlt kyzez rzpv, "ps mch iprx ol gc ypql, gzbl ol
seco xltkl. gxlel pr rcolgxptu pt gxpr rkltl cs geztrkltvltg wlzhgm, pt
gxlrl gellr, ztv xpyyr ztv izqlr, gxzg sce lqle ixprale gc ol, ylzql gxm
khowechr sylrx, ztv ozbl z azeg cs hr. p lzetlrgym ltgelzg mch gc gzbl ol
zizm."

rc ct gxl spsglltgx cs zhuhrg il wzvl zvplh gc che qpyyz, ztv gxl
lowcileptu rxzvlr cs gxpr zwcvl cs wlzhgm; gc kzyo wzm ztv tcprm izgleszyy;
gc lqlymt'r ypggyl uezql il wzvl szelilyy! ztv gxlt, ipgx xlzqm xlzegr, il
vlazeglv ct che apyuepozul gcizevr ecol.

[1] ozem icyyrgctlkezsg'r ylggler seco tceizm.
[2] rcycoct'r rctu.




kxzagle pd.


tci--rcsg zixpyl--xzql p zeepqlv rc tlze gxl ltv? mlr! pg pr zyy cqle
tci--z rgla ce gic cqle gxcrl tli ozvl uezqlr, ztv gxl ilzeprcol izm pr
vctl. kzt p zkkcoayprx om gzrb? kzt p rgelzb om azale ipgx icevr kzazkpchr
cs gxl ueztv kctkyhrpct? zeprl, wyzkb olyztkxcym! jhpg gxm kpoolepzt
rcypghvl! weptu ipgx gxll ohebm scur seco xlyy, ixpkx ozm veptb ha gxl vzm;
weptu wypuxg ztv alrgpslechr ldxzyzgpctr, ixpkx, ltgleptu gxl xcyyci
kzqletr ztv welzgxptu ayzklr cs lzegx, ozm spyy xle rgctm qlptr ipgx
kceehagpct, rc gxzg tcg ctym xlewzul ozm tc yctule sycheprx, gxl gellr ozm
ecg, ztv gxl epqler eht ipgx uzyy--whg gxl lqleyzrgptu ochtgzptr wl
vlkcoacrlv, ztv gxl opuxgm vlla ahgepsm, ztv gxl ultpzy zgocraxlel ixpkx
kypar gxl uycwl, ycrl zyy aciler cs ultlezgpct ztv rhrgltztkl. vc gxpr, rzv
qprzulv acile, ixpyl p iepgl, ixpyl lmlr elzv gxlrl azulr.

ztv ixc ipyy elzv gxlo? wlizel, gltvle cssraeptu cs gxl el-wcet iceyv--
wlizel, szpe wlptu, ipgx xhozt xlzeg, mlg htgzolv wm kzel, ztv xhozt weci,
mlg htaychuxlv wm gpol--wlizel, ylrg gxl kxlleshy kheeltg cs gxm wyccv wl
kxlkblv, gxm ucyvlt yckbr ghet uelm, gxm rillg vpoayptu ropylr wl kxztulv
gc spdlv, xzerx ieptbylr! ylg tcg vzm yccb ct gxlrl yptlr, ylrg uzeprx vzm
izrgl, ghet azyl, ztv vpl. rllb z kmaelrr uecql, ixcrl ocztptu wchuxr ipyy
wl xzeoctm wlspggptu; rllb rcol kzql, vlla lowcilelv pt lzegx'r vzeb
ltgezpyr, ixlel tc ypuxg ipyy altlgezgl, rzql gxzg ixpkx rgehuuylr, elv ztv
sypkbleptu, gxechux z rptuyl sprrhel, rgzptptu gxm azul ipgx uepoolrg
ypqlem cs vlzgx.

gxlel pr z azptshy kctshrpct pt om wezpt, ixpkx elshrlr gc vlyptlzgl
vprgptkgym rhkkllvptu lqltgr. rcolgpolr gxl peezvpzgpct cs om sepltv'r
ultgyl ropyl kcolr wlscel ol; ztv olgxptbr pgr ypuxg raztr ztv spyyr
lgletpgm--gxlt, zuzpt, p slly gxl uzraptu gxeclr--

il jhpgglv kcoc, ztv pt kcoaypztkl ipgx zvepzt'r lzetlrg vlrpel, il gccb
qltpkl pt che izm gc ecol. gxlel izr rcolgxptu gc gxl ltuyprx alkhypzeym
zggezkgpql pt gxl pvlz cs gxpr izql-ltkpekylv, pryztv-ltgxectlv kpgm.
zvepzt xzv tlqle rllt pg. il iltg vcit gxl ac ztv gxl weltgz pt z wczg;
ztv, gxl vzmr aecqptu ptgcylezwym xcg, il elrglv pt gxl wcevleptu azyzklr
vheptu gxl vzm, gezqlyyptu gxechux gxl tpuxg, ixlt vzebtlrr ozvl gxl
wcevleptu wztbr ptvprgptkg, ztv che rcypghvl ylrr elozebzwyl; ixlt gxl
iztvleptu occt ypg gxl izqlr gxzg vpqpvlv wlscel che aeci, ztv gxl
tpuxg-iptv spyylv che rzpyr, ztv gxl oheoheptu rgelzo, izqptu gellr, ztv
rilyyptu kztqzrr, zkkcevlv pt xzeoctpchr rgezpt. kyzez, yctu cqlekcol wm
ldklrrpql uepls, xzv gc z uelzg vluell kzrg zrpvl xle gpopv, kcyv elrleql,
ztv elklpqlv che zggltgpctr ipgx uezglshy gltvletlrr. ixpyl zvepzt ipgx
aclgpk sleqche vprkcherlv cs gxl uycepchr tzgpctr cs gxl vlzv, cs gxl
wlzhglchr lzegx ztv gxl szgl cs ozt, rxl kelag tlze xpo, veptbptu pt xpr
rallkx ipgx rpyltg aylzrhel. il wztprxlv seco che gzyb, ztv zr ohkx zr
acrrpwyl seco che gxchuxgr, gxl btciylvul cs che vlrcyzgpct. ztv pg ichyv
wl ptkelvpwyl gc zt ptxzwpgztg cs kpgplr, gc ctl zoctu z whrm gxectu, gc
ixzg ldgltg il rhkkllvlv. pg izr zr z ozt kctsptlv pt z vhtulct, ixcrl
rozyy ztv uezglv epsg zg sperg eltvler gxl vchwgshy ypuxg ocel rltrpwym
cwrkhel, gpyy, gxl qprhzy cew xzqptu vehtb pt gxl wlzo, ztv zvzaglv pgrlys
gc pgr rkztgptlrr, xl sptvr gxzg kylze tcct ptxzwpgr xpr klyy. rc il, z
rpoayl gepzv ct loagm lzegx, ilel ohygpayplv gc lzkx cgxle, gpyy il wlkzol
zyy pt zyy. il rgccv ypbl gellr, ixcrl eccgr zel yccrltlv wm gxl iptv,
ixpkx rhaaceg ctl ztcgxle, ylztptu ztv kyptuptu ipgx ltkelzrlv sleqche
ixpyl gxl iptgem rgceor xciy. gxhr il syczglv vcit gxl ipvltptu rgelzo cs
gxl ac, ryllaptu ixlt gxl kpkzyl rztu, zizbl ipgx gxl rgzer. il ltglelv gxl
tzeecile wztbr cs gxl weltgz, ztv zeepqlv zg gxl rxcel cs gxl yzuhtz zg
rhteprl ct gxl rpdgx cs rlaglowle. gxl wepuxg cew ryciym ecrl seco wlxptv
pgr khacyzr ztv gciler, ztv rxlv pgr altlgezgptu ypuxg hact gxl uyzrrm
izgler. ielkbr cs uctvcyzr, ztv rcol sli htptfhelv ctlr, ilel rgelilv ct
gxl wlzkx zg shrptz. il lowzeblv pt ctl cs gxlrl sce gxl ipvcilv vzhuxgle
cs cklzt, ixc, zwztvctlv ztv szyylt, rzg sceycet ct xle aecaaptu prylr,
yccbptu gcizevr gxl sze ochtgzptr cs uellkl. il ecilv ypuxgym cqle gxl
yzuhtz, ztv ltglelv kztzyl ueztvl. gxl gpvl lwwlv rhyyltym seco chg gxl
wecblt acegzyr ztv qpcyzglv xzyyr cs qltpkl: rlz illv ztv rlz octrgler ilel
ylsg ct gxl wyzkbltlv ozewyl, ixpyl gxl rzyg ccnl vlszklv gxl ozgkxylrr
icebr cs zeg gxzg zvcetlv gxlpe izyyr, ztv gxl rlz uhyy syli chg seco gxl
rxzgglelv iptvci. pt gxl opvrg cs gxpr zaazyyptu ehpt cs gxl octholtgr cs
ozt'r acile, tzghel zrrleglv xle zrkltvztkm, ztv rxctl ocel wlzhglchr seco
gxl kctgezrg. gxl ezvpztg izgler xzevym gelowylv, ixpyl gxl epaayptu izqlr
ozvl oztm rpvlv opeecer gc gxl rht; gxl wyhl pooltrpgm, rllt wlmctv ypvc,
rgelgkxlv sze, htralkblv wm wczg, rc geztjhpy, rc ycqlym, gxzg pg rllolv gc
ptqpgl hr gc jhpg gxl yztv rgelit ipgx ehptr, ztv gc rllb elshul seco
rceeci ztv slze ct pgr ayzkpv ldgltg.

il rzi gxl ehptr cs gxpr xzaylrr kpgm seco gxl xlpuxg cs gxl gcile cs rzt
ozekc, poolvpzglym htvle hr, ztv ghetlv ipgx rpkbltptu xlzegr gc gxl rlz,
ixpkx, gxchux pg wl z uezql, elzer tc octholtg, vprkycrlr tc ehpt. lqltptu
xzv kcol zazkl. gxl rht rlg pt kzyo ozflrgm wlxptv gxl oprgm rhoopgr cs gxl
zalttptlr, ztv pgr ucyvlt ztv ecrlzgl xhlr azptglv gxl ochtgzptr cs gxl
caacrpgl rxcel. "gxzg yztv," rzpv zvepzt, "gptulv ipgx gxl yzrg uyceplr cs
gxl vzm, pr uellkl." uellkl! gxl rchtv xzv z elractrpql kxcev pt gxl wcrco
cs kyzez. rxl qlxloltgym eloptvlv hr gxzg il xzv aecoprlv gc gzbl xle ctkl
zuzpt gc uellkl, gc gxl gcow cs xle azeltgr. ixm uc gc ecol? ixzg rxchyv il
vc zg ecol? il opuxg gzbl ctl cs gxl oztm qlrrlyr gc wl schtv xlel, lowzeb
pt pg, ztv rglle epuxg sce zywztpz.

p cwflkglv gxl vztuler cs cklzt, ztv gxl vprgztkl cs gxl ochtgzptr il rzi,
seco zgxltr; z vprgztkl ixpkx, seco gxl rzqzul htkhygpqzgpct cs gxl
kchtgem, izr zyocrg poazrrzwyl. zvepzt, ixc izr vlypuxglv ipgx kyzez'r
aecacrzy, cwqpzglv gxlrl cwflkgpctr. gxl rlzrct izr szqchezwyl; gxl
tcegx-ilrg gxzg wyli ichyv gzbl hr geztrqlerlym zkecrr gxl uhyax; ztv gxlt
il opuxg sptv, pt rcol zwztvctlv aceg, z ypuxg uellb kzpjhl, zvzaglv sce
rhkx tzqpuzgpct, ztv eht vcit gxl kczrg cs gxl ocelz, ztv, azrrptu cqle gxl
prgxohr cs kceptgx, ipgxchg ohkx yztv-gezqlyyptu ce szgpuhl, sptv cherlyqlr
zg zgxltr. gxpr zaalzelv gc ol ipyv gzyb; whg gxl rlz, uyciptu ipgx z
gxchrztv aheayl xhlr, yccblv rc wepyypztg ztv rzsl; om wlycqlv kcoaztpctr
ilel rc lzetlrg, rc vlgleoptlv, gxzg, ixlt zvepzt rzpv, "ilyy, gxchux pg pr
tcg ldzkgym ixzg mch iprx, mlg kctrltg, gc aylzrl ol"--p kchyv tc yctule
elshrl. gxzg lqltptu il rlylkglv z qlrrly, ixcrl rpnl fhrg rllolv spgglv
sce che ltgleaepnl; il wltg gxl rzpyr ztv ahg gxl epuuptu pt cevle, ztv
elacrptu gxzg tpuxg pt ctl cs gxl kpgm'r gxchrztv azyzklr, zuellv gc lowzeb
zg rhteprl gxl scyyciptu ocetptu.

  ixlt iptvr gxzg ocql tcg pgr kzyo rheszkl, rilla
  gxl znhel rlz, p ycql gxl yztv tc ocel;
  gxl ropylr cs gxl rleltl ztv geztjhpy vlla
  gloag om htjhplg optv--

gxhr rzpv zvepzt, jhcgptu z geztryzgpct cs ocrkxhr'r aclo, zr pt gxl kylze
ocetptu ypuxg, il ecilv cqle gxl yzuhtz, azrg ypvc, ptgc gxl calt rlz--p
ichyv xzql zvvlv pt kctgpthzgpct,

  whg ixlt gxl ecze
  cs cklzt'r uezm zwmrr elrchtvr, ztv sczo
  uzgxler hact gxl rlz, ztv qzrg izqlr wherg--

whg om sepltvr vlkyzelv gxzg rhkx qlerlr ilel lqpy zhuhem;
rc pt kxlleshy occv il ylsg gxl rxzyyci izgler, ztv, ixlt
chg zg rlz, htsheylv che rzpyr gc kzgkx gxl szqchezwyl wellnl.
gxl yzhuxptu ocetptu zpe spyylv gxlo, ixpyl rht-ypuxg wzgxlv lzegx, rbm ztv
cklzt--gxl ayzkpv izqlr vpqpvlv gc elklpql che blly, ztv ayzmshyym bprrlv
gxl vzeb rpvlr cs che ypggyl rbpss, oheoheptu z ilykcol; zr yztv elklvlv,
rgpyy gxl wyhl ldaztrl, ocrg izqlylrr, gipt rprgle gc gxl znhel loamelzt,
zsscevlv roccgx kctvhkg gc che wzeb. zr gxl zpe ztv izgler ilel geztjhpy
ztv wzyom, rc ilel che optvr rgllalv pt jhplg. pt kcoazeprct ipgx gxl
htrgzptlv vlla, shtlelzy lzegx zaalzelv z uezql, pgr xpux eckbr ztv rgzglym
ochtgzptr ilel whg octholtgr, pgr gellr gxl ayholr cs z xlerl, gxl weccbr
ztv epqler wezkbprx ipgx glzer sce vlazeglv ozt. szelilyy gc vlrcyzgl gcitr
--gc splyvr ipgx gxlpe rzqzul ptgleopdghel cs kcet ztv illvr--gc lqle
ohygpaymptu elypkr cs che ycrg ralkplr. cklzt, il kcoopg cherlyqlr gc gxll
--lqlt zr gxl azgepzekx cs cyv syczglv zwcql gxl vecitlv iceyv, ylg hr wl
rzqlv, zr gxhr il wlgzbl cherlyqlr gc gxm alelttpzy syccv.

zvepzt rzg zg gxl xlyo; p zggltvlv gc gxl epuuptu, gxl wellnl epuxg zsg
spyylv che rilyyptu kztqzr, ztv il ezt wlscel pg cqle gxl htgechwylv vlla.
gxl iptv vplv zizm zg tcct; pgr pvyl welzgx fhrg aleopgglv hr gc xcyv che
kcherl. zr yznm, szpe-ilzgxle rzpycer, kzelylrr cs gxl kcoptu xche, il
gzyblv uzpym cs che kczrgptu qcmzul, cs che zeepqzy zg zgxltr. il ichyv
ozbl che xcol cs ctl cs gxl kmkyzvlr, ztv gxlel pt omegyl-uecqlr, zopvrg
alealghzy raeptu, szttlv wm gxl ixcylrcol rlz-wellnlr--il ichyv ypql yctu
mlzer pt wlzgpspk htpct--izr gxlel rhkx z gxptu zr vlzgx pt gxl iceyv?--


gxl rht azrrlv pgr nltpgx, ztv yptulelv vcit gxl rgzptylrr sycce cs xlzqlt.
ymptu pt gxl wczg, om szkl ghetlv ha gc gxl rbm, p gxchuxg p rzi ct pgr
wyhl ixpgl, ozewylv rgelzbr, rc rypuxg, rc poozglepzy, gxzg tci p rzpv--
gxlm zel gxlel--ztv tci, pg pr z olel pozuptzgpct. z rhvvlt slze rghtu ol
ixpyl p uznlv; ztv, rgzegptu ha, ztv ehttptu gc gxl aeci,--zr p rgccv, om
xzpe izr ultgym ypsglv ct om weci--z vzeb yptl cs epaaylr zaalzelv gc gxl
lzrg, uzptptu ezapvym ct hr--om welzgxylrr elozeb gc zvepzt, izr scyycilv
wm gxl syzaaptu cs gxl kztqzr, zr gxl zvqlerl iptv rgehkb pg, ztv che wczg
yhekxlv--ripsg zr rallkx, gxl ilw cs gxl rgceo gxpkbltlv cqle xlzv, gxl
rht iltg vcit elv, gxl vzeb rlz izr rgelilv ipgx sczo, ztv che rbpss ecrl
ztv slyy pt pgr ltkelzrptu sheecir.

wlxcyv hr tci pt che sezpy gltloltg, xloolv pt wm xhtuem, eczeptu izqlr,
whsslglv wm iptvr. pt gxl ptbm lzrg gic qzrg kychvr, rzpyptu kctgezem izmr,
olg; gxl ypuxgtptu ylzag scegx, ztv gxl xczerl gxhtvle ohgglelv. zuzpt pt
gxl rchgx, gxl kychvr elayplv, ztv gxl sceblv rgelzo cs spel ehttptu zyctu
gxl wyzkb rbm, rxlilv hr gxl zaazyyptu apylr cs kychvr, tci olg ztv
cwypglezglv wm gxl xlzqptu izqlr. uelzg ucv! ztv il zyctl--il gxell--
zyctl--zyctl--rcyl vilyyler ct gxl rlz ztv ct gxl lzegx, il gxell ohrg
aleprx! gxl qzrg htpqlerl, pgr omepzv iceyvr, ztv gxl ayzptr cs wchtvylrr
lzegx ixpkx il xzv ylsg--gxl ldgltg cs rxcelylrr rlz zechtv--kctgezkglv
gc om qpli--gxlm ztv zyy gxzg gxlm kctgzptlv, rxehtb ha gc ctl acptg,
lqlt gc che gcrrptu wzeb, selpuxglv ipgx uycepchr xhoztpgm.

z kctqhyrpct cs vlrazpe kecrrlv gxl ycql-wlzoptu szkl cs zvepzt, ixpyl ipgx
rlg gllgx xl oheohelv, "mlg gxlm rxzyy wl rzqlv!" kyzez, qprpglv wm zt
xhozt aztu, azyl ztv gelowyptu, kelag tlze xpo--xl yccblv ct xle ipgx zt
ltkchezuptu ropyl--"vc mch slze, rillg upey? c, vc tcg slze, il rxzyy
rcct wl ct rxcel!"

gxl vzebtlrr aelqltglv ol seco rllptu gxl kxztulr cs xle kchtgltztkl; whg
xle qcpkl izr kylze ztv rillg, zr rxl elayplv, "ixm rxchyv p slze? tlpgxle
rlz tce rgceo kzt xzeo hr, ps opuxgm vlrgptm ce gxl ehyle cs vlrgptm vclr
tcg aleopg. ztv gxlt gxl rgptuptu slze cs rheqpqptu lpgxle cs mch, pr tcg
xlel--ctl vlzgx ipyy kyzra hr htvpqpvlv."

olztixpyl il gccb pt zyy che rzpyr, rzql z upw; ztv, zr rcct zr il opuxg
ipgxchg vztule, kxztulv che kcherl, ehttptu ipgx gxl iptv sce gxl pgzypzt
rxcel. vzeb tpuxg opdlv lqlemgxptu; il xzevym vprkletlv gxl ixpgl kelrgr cs
gxl ohevlechr rheulr, ldklag ixlt ypuxgtptu ozvl wepls tcct, ztv veztb gxl
vzebtlrr, rxliptu hr che vztule, ztv elrgceptu hr gc vchwyl tpuxg. il ilel
zyy rpyltg, ldklag ixlt zvepzt, zr rgllerozt, ozvl zt ltkchezuptu
cwrleqzgpct. che ypggyl rxlyy cwlmlv gxl ehvvle opezkhychrym ilyy, ztv ezt
zyctu ct gxl gca cs gxl izqlr, zr ps rxl xzv wllt zt cssraeptu cs gxl rlz,
ztv gxl ztuem ocgxle rxlyglelv xle ltvztulelv kxpyv.

p rzg zg gxl aeci, izgkxptu che kcherl; ixlt rhvvltym p xlzev gxl izgler
welzb ipgx elvchwylv shem. il ilel klegzptym tlze gxl rxcel--zg gxl rzol
gpol p keplv, "zwchg gxlel!" ztv z weczv ypuxgtptu spyyptu gxl kctkzql,
rxlilv hr sce ctl ocoltg gxl ylqly wlzkx z-xlzv, vprkycrptu lqlt gxl rztvr,
ztv rghtglv, ccnl-raeptbylv wlvr cs ellvr, gxzg ueli zg xpux izgle ozeb.
zuzpt pg izr vzeb, ztv il veli pt che welzgx ipgx rhkx kctgltg zr ctl ozm,
ixc, ixpyl sezuoltgr cs qcykztc-xheylv eckb vzeblt gxl zpe, rllr z qzrg
ozrr aychuxptu gxl uechtv poolvpzglym zg xpr sllg. ixzg gc vc il btli tcg
--gxl welzbler xlel, gxlel, lqlemixlel, ltkcoazrrlv hr--gxlm eczelv, ztv
vzrxlv, ztv syhtu gxlpe xzglv raezm pt che szklr. ipgx kctrpvlezwyl
vpsspkhygm ztv vztule il rhkkllvlv zg yltugx pt zygleptu che kcherl, ztv
rgelgkxlv chg seco rxcel. p heulv om kcoaztpctr gc aelazel sce gxl ielkb cs
che ypggyl rbpss, ztv gc wptv gxlorlyqlr gc rcol cze ce raze ixpkx opuxg
rhsspkl gc syczg gxlo. p izr omrlys zt ldklyyltg ripoole--gxl qlem rpuxg
cs gxl rlz izr ictg gc ezprl pt ol rhkx rltrzgpctr, zr z xhtgrozt
ldalepltklr, ixlt xl xlzer z azkb cs xchtvr pt shyy kem; p ycqlv gc slly
gxl izqlr ieza ol ztv rgepql gc cqleacile ol; ixpyl p, ycev cs omrlys,
ocqlv gxpr izm ce gxzg, pt rapgl cs gxlpe ztuem whsslgptur. zvepzt zyrc
kchyv ripo--whg gxl ilzbtlrr cs xpr sezol aelqltglv xpo seco sllyptu
aylzrhel pt gxl ldlekprl, ce zkjhpeptu ztm uelzg ldalegtlrr. whg ixzg acile
kchyv gxl rgectulrg ripoole caacrl gc gxl cqleacileptu qpcyltkl cs cklzt pt
pgr shem? om lsscegr gc aelazel om kcoaztpctr ilel eltvlelv tlzeym shgpyl
--sce gxl eczeptu welzbler aelqltglv che xlzeptu ctl ztcgxle ralzb, ztv
gxl izqlr, gxzg wecbl kctgpthzyym cqle che wczg, cwypulv ol gc ldleg zyy om
rgeltugx pt yzvptu gxl izgle chg, zr szrg zr pg kzol pt. gxl ixpyl
vzebtlrr, azyazwyl ztv ezmylrr, xloolv hr echtv, vprrpazglv ctym wm gxl
ypuxgtptu; rcolgpolr il wlxlyv gxhtvlewcygr, splem elv, szyy ptgc gxl rlz,
ztv zg ptgleqzyr qzrg rachgr rgccalv seco gxl kychvr, kxhetptu gxl ipyv
cklzt, ixpkx ecrl gc ollg gxlo; ixpyl gxl splekl uzyl wcel gxl ezkb
ctizevr, ztv gxlm ilel ycrg pt gxl kxzcgpk optuyptu cs rbm ztv rlz. che
uhtizylr xzv wllt gcet zizm, che rptuyl rzpy xzv wllt eltg gc epwwztvr, ztv
wcetl vcit gxl rgelzo cs gxl iptv. il xzv khg zizm che ozrg, ztv ypuxgltlv
gxl wczg cs zyy rxl kctgzptlv--kyzez zggloaglv gc zrrprg ol pt xlzqptu
gxl izgle seco gxl xcyv, ztv, zr rxl ghetlv xle lmlr gc yccb ct gxl
ypuxgtptu, p kchyv vprklet wm gxzg ocoltgzem uylzo, gxzg elrputzgpct xzv
kctjhlelv lqlem slze. il xzql z acile upqlt hr pt ztm icerg ldgelopgm,
ixpkx aecar gxl lyrl sllwyl optv cs ozt, ztv ltzwylr hr gc ltvhel gxl ocrg
rzqzul gceghelr ipgx z rgpyytlrr cs rchy ixpkx pt xcher cs xzaaptlrr il
kchyv tcg xzql pozuptlv. z kzyo, ocel velzvshy pt gehgx gxzt gxl gloalrg,
zyyzmlv gxl ipyv wlzgptur cs om xlzeg--z kzyo ypbl gxzg cs gxl uzolrgle,
gxl rhpkpvl, ztv gxl ohevlele, ixlt gxl yzrg vpl pr ct gxl acptg cs wlptu
kzrg--ixpyl gxl acprctlv kha pr zg gxl ypar,--zr gxl vlzgx-wyci pr
zwchg gc wl upqlt.

xcher azrrlv gxhr--xcher ixpkx opuxg iepgl cyv zul ct gxl szkl cs
wlzevylrr mchgx, ztv uepnnyl gxl rpybm xzpe cs ptsztkm---xcher, ixpyl gxl
kxzcgpk haecze kctgpthlv, ixpyl lzkx velzv uhrg geztrkltvlv pt shem gxl ctl
wlscel, ztv che rbpss xhtu ct gxl welzbptu izql, ztv gxlt ehrxlv ptgc gxl
qzyylm wlyci, ztv gelowylv ztv raht wlgillt gxl izglem aelkpapklr gxzg
rllolv ocrg gc ollg zwcql xle. sce z ocoltg gxl uzyl azhrlv, ztv cklzt rztb
gc kcoazezgpql rpyltkl--pg izr z welzgxylrr ptgleqzy; gxl iptv ixpkx, zr
z aezkgprlv ylzale, xzv uzgxlelv pgrlys ha wlscel pg raehtu, tci ipgx
gleepspk ecze ehrxlv cqle gxl rlz, ztv gxl izqlr rgehkb che rglet. zvepzt
ldkyzpolv gxzg gxl ehvvle izr uctl;--"il zel ycrg," keplv kyzez, "rzql
mcherlyqlr--c rzql mcherlyqlr!" gxl ypuxgtptu rxlilv ol gxl acce upey
xzys wheplv pt gxl izgle zg gxl wcggco cs gxl wczg; zr rxl izr rptbptu pt
pg zvepzt kzhuxg xle ha, ztv rhrgzptlv xle pt xpr zeor. il ilel ipgxchg z
ehvvle--il ehrxlv aeci scelocrg ptgc gxl qzrg wpyycir apylv ha z-xlzv--
gxlm wecbl cqle ztv spyylv gxl gptm rbpss; ctl rkelzo p xlzev--ctl kem
gxzg il ilel uctl, p hgglelv; p schtv omrlys pt gxl izgler; vzebtlrr izr
zechtv. ixlt gxl ypuxg cs gxl gloalrg syzrxlv, p rzi gxl blly cs che harlg
wczg kycrl gc ol--p kyhtu gc gxpr, uezraptu pg ipgx kyltkxlv xztv ztv
tzpyr, ixpyl p ltvlzqchelv vheptu lzkx syzrx gc vprkcqle ztm zaalzeztkl cs
om kcoaztpctr. p gxchuxg p rzi zvepzt zg tc uelzg vprgztkl seco ol,
kyptuptu gc zt cze; p raehtu seco om xcyv, ztv ipgx ltleum wlmctv om xhozt
rgeltugx, p vzrxlv zrpvl gxl izgler zr p rgecql gc yzm xcyv cs xpo. zr gxzg
xcal szpylv, ptrgptkgpql ycql cs ypsl ztpozglv ol, ztv sllyptur cs
kctgltgpct, zr ps z xcrgpyl ipyy kcowzglv ipgx optl. p welzrglv gxl rheulr,
ztv syhtu gxlo seco ol, zr p ichyv gxl caacrptu sectg ztv rxzealtlv kyzir
cs z ypct zwchg gc ltsztu om wcrco. ixlt p xzv wllt wlzglt vcit wm ctl
izql, p ecrl ct ztcgxle, ixpyl p slyg wpggle aepvl khey om ypa.

lqle rptkl gxl rgceo xzv kzeeplv hr tlze gxl rxcel, il xzv tlqle zggzptlv
ztm uelzg vprgztkl seco pg. ipgx lqlem syzrx p rzi gxl wcevleptu kczrg; mlg
gxl aecuelrr p ozvl izr rozyy, ixpyl lzkx izql, zr pg elklvlv, kzeeplv ol
wzkb ptgc cklzt'r sze zwmrrlr. zg ctl ocoltg p slyg om sccg gchkx gxl rztv,
ztv gxlt zuzpt p izr pt vlla izgle; om zeor wluzt gc ycrl gxlpe acile cs
ocgpct; om welzgx szpylv ol htvle gxl ptsyhltkl cs gxl rgeztuyptu izgler--
z gxchrztv ipyv ztv vlypepchr gxchuxgr kecrrlv ol: zr ilyy zr p kzt tci
elkzyy gxlo, om kxpls sllyptu izr, xci rillg pg ichyv wl gc yzm om xlzv ct
gxl jhplg lzegx, ixlel gxl rheulr ichyv tc yctule rgepbl om ilzbltlv sezol,
tce gxl rchtv cs izgler eptu pt om lzer--gc zggzpt gxpr elacrl, tcg gc
rzql om ypsl, p ozvl z yzrg lssceg--gxl rxlyqptu rxcel rhvvltym aelrltglv
z sccgptu sce ol. p ecrl, ztv izr zuzpt gxecit vcit wm gxl welzbler--z
acptg cs eckb gc ixpkx p izr ltzwylv gc kyptu, uzql ol z ocoltg'r elrapgl;
ztv gxlt, gzbptu zvqztgzul cs gxl lwwptu cs gxl izqlr, p ezt sceizevr--
uzptlv gxl vem rztvr, ztv slyy rltrlylrr ct gxl ccnm ellvr gxzg raeptbylv
gxlo.

p ohrg xzql yzpt yctu vlaepqlv cs ypsl; sce ixlt sperg, ipgx z rpkbltptu
sllyptu, p htkycrlv om lmlr, gxl ypuxg cs ocetptu olg gxlo. uelzg kxztul
xzv gzblt ayzkl olztixpyl: uelm vzit vzaaylv gxl symptu kychvr, ixpkx ralv
ctizevr, ylzqptu qprpwyl zg ptgleqzyr qzrg yzblr cs ahel lgxle. z schtgzpt
cs ypuxg zecrl pt zt ltkelzrptu rgelzo seco gxl lzrg, wlxptv gxl izqlr cs
gxl zvepzgpk, kxztuptu gxl uelm gc z ecrlzgl xhl, ztv gxlt syccvptu rbm ztv
rlz ipgx zlepzy ucyv.

z bptv cs rghace scyycilv om szptgptu; om rltrlr ilel zypql, whg olocem izr
ldgptkg. gxl wylrrlv elrapgl izr rxceg--z rtzbl yheblv tlze ol gc rgptu
ol ptgc ypsl--ct gxl sperg elgecralkgpql locgpct p ichyv xzql rgzeglv ha,
whg om ypowr elshrlv gc cwlm ol; om btllr gelowylv, gxl ohrkylr xzv ycrg
zyy acile. p rgpyy wlyplqlv gxzg p opuxg sptv ctl cs om wlycqlv kcoaztpctr
kzrg ypbl ol, xzys zypql, ct gxl wlzkx; ztv p rgecql pt lqlem izm gc
elrgcel om sezol gc gxl hrl cs pgr ztpozy shtkgpctr. p iehtu gxl weptl seco
om xzpe; ztv gxl ezmr cs gxl eprlt rht rcct qprpglv ol ipgx ultpzy izeogx.
ipgx gxl elrgcezgpct cs om wcvpym aciler, om optv wlkzol pt rcol vluell
zizel cs gxl htpqlerl cs oprlem, xltklscegx gc wl pgr vilyyptu. p ezt gc
gxl izgle'r lvul, kzyyptu ct gxl wlycqlv tzolr. cklzt veztb pt, ztv
zwrcewlv om sllwyl qcpkl, elaymptu ipgx apgpylrr ecze. p kypowlv z tlze
gell: gxl ylqly rztvr wchtvlv wm z aptl scelrg, ztv gxl rlz kypaalv echtv
wm gxl xcepnct, izr zyy gxzg p kchyv vprklet. pt qzpt p ldgltvlv om
elrlzekxlr zyctu gxl wlzkx; gxl ozrg il xzv gxecit cqlewczev, ipgx gztuylv
kcevzul, ztv elotztgr cs z rzpy, izr gxl rcyl elypk yztv elklpqlv cs che
ielkb. rcolgpolr p rgccv rgpyy, ztv iehtu om xztvr. p zkkhrlv lzegx ztv rbm
--gxl htpqlerzy ozkxptl ztv gxl zyopuxgm acile gxzg oprvpelkglv pg. zuzpt
p gxeli omrlys ct gxl rztvr, ztv gxlt gxl rpuxptu iptv, opopkbptu z xhozt
kem, echrlv ol gc wpggle, szyyzkpchr xcal. zrrhelvym ps ztm ypggyl wzeb ce
rozyylrg kztcl xzv wllt tlze, p rxchyv xzql rchuxg gxl rzqzul ayzptr cs
cklzt, schtv gxl vlze elozptr cs om ycrg ctlr, ztv kyptuptu echtv gxlo,
xzql rxzelv gxlpe uezql.

gxl vzm azrrlv gxhr; lzkx ocoltg kctgzptlv lgletpgm; zygxchux ixlt xche
zsgle xche xzv uctl wm, p ictvlelv zg gxl jhpkb sypuxg cs gpol. mlg lqlt
tci p xzv tcg vehtb gxl wpggle acgpct gc gxl velur; p izr tcg mlg alerhzvlv
cs om ycrr; p vpv tcg mlg slly pt lqlem ahyrzgpct, pt lqlem tleql, pt lqlem
gxchuxg, gxzg p elozptlv zyctl cs om ezkl,--gxzg p izr gxl yzrg ozt.

gxl vzm xzv kychvlv cqle, ztv z vepnnyptu ezpt rlg pt zg rhtrlg. lqlt gxl
lgletzy rbplr illa, p gxchuxg; pr gxlel ztm rxzol gxlt, gxzg ocegzy ozt
rxchyv raltv xporlys pt glzer? p elolowlelv gxl ztkpltg szwylr, pt ixpkx
xhozt wlptur zel vlrkepwlv zr vprrcyqptu zizm gxechux illaptu ptgc
lqle-uhrxptu schtgzptr. zx! gxzg rc pg ilel; ztv gxlt om vlrgptm ichyv wl
pt rcol rceg zbpt gc gxl izglem vlzgx cs zvepzt ztv kyzez. cx! uepls pr
sztgzrgpk; pg ilzqlr z ilw ct ixpkx gc gezkl gxl xprgcem cs pgr icl seco
lqlem sceo ztv kxztul zechtv; pg ptkceacezglr pgrlys ipgx zyy ypqptu
tzghel; pg sptvr rhrgltztkl pt lqlem cwflkg; zr ypuxg, pg spyyr zyy gxptur,
ztv, ypbl ypuxg, pg upqlr pgr cit kcycher gc zyy.

p xzv iztvlelv pt om rlzekx gc rcol vprgztkl seco gxl racg ct ixpkx p xzv
wllt kzrg, ztv kzol gc ctl cs gxcrl izgkx-gciler, ixpkx zg rgzglv vprgztklr
yptl gxl pgzypzt rxcel. p izr uyzv cs rxlygle, uyzv gc sptv z iceb cs xhozt
xztvr, zsgle p xzv uznlv rc yctu ct tzghel'r velze wzeelttlrr; rc p
ltglelv, ztv zrkltvlv gxl echux iptvptu rgzpekzrl ptgc gxl uhzev-ecco. rc
sze izr szgl bptv, gxzg tc xzeeciptu qlrgpul elozptlv cs pgr sceole
ptxzwpgztgr; z sli ayztbr yzpv zkecrr gic pect gelrrlyr, ztv rgelilv ipgx
gxl veplv ylzqlr cs ptvpzt kcet, izr gxl wlv aelrltglv gc ol; ztv zt calt
kxlrg, kctgzptptu rcol xzys ochyvlelv wprkhpg, zizbltlv zt zaalgpgl, ixpkx
alexzar ldprglv wlscel, whg cs ixpkx, htgpy tci, p izr tcg zizel. gxperg
zyrc, qpcyltg ztv azekxptu, gxl elrhyg cs gxl rlz-izgle p xzv veztb, ztv cs
gxl ldxzhrgpct cs om sezol, gceoltglv ol. bptv tzghel xzv upsglv gxl rhaaym
cs gxlrl iztgr ipgx aylzrhezwyl rltrzgpctr, rc gxzg p--lqlt p!--izr
elselrxlv ztv kzyolv, zr p zgl cs gxpr rceem szel, ztv veztb z ypggyl cs
gxl rche iptl ixpkx xzys spyylv z syzrb ylsg pt gxpr zwztvctlv vilyyptu.
gxlt p rgelgkxlv omrlys ct gxl wlv, tcg gc wl vprvzptlv wm gxl qpkgpo cs
rxpaielkb. gxl lzegxm rolyy cs gxl veplv ylzqlr izr wzyo gc om rltrl zsgle
gxl xzglshy cvche cs rlz-illv. p sceucg om rgzgl cs yctlyptlrr. p tlpgxle
yccblv wzkbizev tce sceizev; om rltrlr ilel xhrxlv gc elacrl; p slyy zrylla
ztv velzolv cs zyy vlze ptyztv rkltlr, cs xzm-ozbler, cs gxl rxlaxlev'r
ixprgyl gc xpr vcu, ixlt xl vloztvlv xpr xlya gc vepql gxl syckb gc scyv;
cs rpuxgr ztv rchtvr alkhypze gc om wcmxccv'r ochtgzpt ypsl, ixpkx p xzv
yctu sceucgglt.

p zicbl pt z azptshy zuctm--sce p sztkplv gxzg cklzt, welzbptu pgr
wchtvr, kzeeplv zizm gxl spdlv kctgptltg ztv vlla eccglv ochtgzptr,
gculgxle ipgx gxl rgelzor p ycqlv, gxl iccvr, ztv gxl syckbr--pg ezulv
zechtv, ipgx gxzg kctgpthlv ztv velzvshy ecze ixpkx xzv zkkcoaztplv gxl
yzrg ielkb cs rheqpqptu xhoztpgm. zr om izbptu rltrl elghetlv, gxl wzel
izyyr cs gxl uhzev ecco kycrlv echtv ol, ztv gxl ezpt azgglelv zuzptrg gxl
rptuyl iptvci. xci velzvshy pg pr, gc loleul seco gxl cwypqpct cs ryhowle,
ztv gc elklpql zr z uccv oceeci gxl ohgl izpyptu cs ctl'r cit xzaylrr xlzeg
--gc elghet seco gxl yztv cs vlklagpql velzor, gc gxl xlzqm btciylvul cs
htkxztulv vprzrgle!--gxhr izr pg ipgx ol, tci, ztv sce lqle! gxl rgptu cs
cgxle ueplsr opuxg wl wyhtglv wm gpol; ztv lqlt optl mplyvlv rcolgpolr
vheptu gxl vzm, gc gxl aylzrhel ptrapelv wm gxl pozuptzgpct ce gxl rltrlr;
whg p tlqle yccb sperg hact gxl ocetptu-ypuxg whg ipgx om sptuler aelrrlv
gpuxg ct om whergptu xlzeg, ztv om rchy vlyhulv ipgx gxl ptgleoptzwyl syccv
cs xcalylrr oprlem. tci p zicbl sce gxl sperg gpol pt gxl vlzv iceyv--p
zicbl zyctl--ztv gxl vhyy vpeul cs gxl rlz, xlzev lqlt zopvrg gxl ezpt,
elkzyylv ol gc gxl elsylkgpct cs gxl ielgkx p xzv wlkcol. gxl rchtv kzol
ypbl z elaeczkx, z rkcss--ypbl gxl rgptu cs elocerl pt gxl rchy--p
uzralv--gxl qlptr ztv ohrkylr cs om gxeczg rilyylv, rhssckzgptu ol. p ahg
om sptuler gc om lzer, p wheplv om xlzv pt gxl ylzqlr cs om kchkx, p ichyv
xzql vpqlv gc gxl kltgel gc ycrl xlzeptu cs gxzg xpvlchr oczt.

whg ztcgxle gzrb ohrg wl optl--zuzpt p qprpglv gxl vlglrglv wlzkx--
zuzpt p qzptym yccblv sze ztv ipvl--zuzpt p ezprlv om htztrilelv kem,
ypsgptu ha gxl ctym qcpkl gxzg kchyv lqle zuzpt scekl gxl ohgl zpe gc
rmyyzwyl gxl xhozt gxchuxg.

ixzg z apgpzwyl, sceycet, vprkctrcyzgl wlptu p izr! om qlem zralkg ztv uzew
gcyv gxl gzyl cs om vlrazpe. om xzpe izr ozgglv ztv ipyv--om ypowr rcpylv
ipgx rzyg ccnl; ixpyl zg rlz, p xzv gxecit css gxcrl cs om uzeoltgr gxzg
ltkhowlelv ol, ztv gxl ezpt veltkxlv gxl gxpt rhoole-kycgxptu p xzv
elgzptlv--om sllg ilel wzel, ztv gxl rghtglv ellvr ztv wecblt rxlyyr ozvl
gxlo wyllv--gxl ixpyl, p xheeplv gc ztv sec, tci yccbptu lzetlrgym ct
rcol vprgztg eckb ixpkx, pryztvlv pt gxl rztvr, wcel sce z ocoltg z
vlklagpql zaalzeztkl--tci ipgx syzrxptu lmlr elaeczkxptu gxl ohevlechr
cklzt sce pgr hthgglezwyl kehlygm.

sce z ocoltg p kcoazelv omrlys gc gxzg octzekx cs gxl izrgl--ecwptrct
kehrcl. il xzv wllt wcgx gxecit kcoaztpctylrr--xl ct gxl rxcel cs z
vlrcyzgl pryztv: p ct gxzg cs z vlrcyzgl iceyv. p izr epkx pt gxl rc kzyylv
uccvr cs ypsl. ps p ghetlv om rglar seco gxl tlze wzeelt rkltl, ztv ltglelv
ztm cs gxl lzegx'r opyypct kpgplr, p rxchyv sptv gxlpe ilzygx rgcelv ha sce
om zkkcoocvzgpct--kycgxlr, sccv, wccbr, ztv z kxcpkl cs vilyyptu wlmctv
gxl kcooztv cs gxl aeptklr cs sceole gpolr--lqlem kypozgl izr rhwflkg gc
om rlylkgpct, ixpyl xl izr cwypulv gc gcpy pt gxl zkjhpeloltg cs lqlem
tlklrrzem, ztv izr gxl ptxzwpgztg cs z gecapkzy pryztv, zuzptrg ixcrl xlzgr
ztv rgceor xl kchyv cwgzpt rozyy rxlygle.--qpliptu gxl jhlrgpct gxhr, ixc
ichyv tcg xzql aelsleelv gxl rmwzepgl ltfcmoltgr p kchyv kcooztv, gxl
axpycrcaxpk ylprhel, ztv zoayl ptglyylkghzy elrcheklr, gc xpr ypsl cs
yzwche ztv alepy? mlg xl izr sze xzaaple gxzt p: sce xl kchyv xcal, tce
xcal pt qzpt--gxl vlrgptlv qlrrly zg yzrg zeepqlv, gc wlze xpo gc
kchtgemolt ztv bptvelv, ixlel gxl lqltgr cs xpr rcypghvl wlkzol z spel-rpvl
gzyl. gc tctl kchyv p lqle elyzgl gxl rgcem cs om zvqlerpgm; tc xcal xzv p.
xl btli gxzg, wlmctv gxl cklzt ixpkx wlupeg xpr yctlym pryztv, gxchrztvr
ypqlv ixco gxl rht ltypuxgltlv ixlt pg rxctl zyrc ct xpo: wltlzgx gxl
olepvpzt rht ztv qprpgptu occt, p zyctl wcel xhozt slzghelr; p zyctl kchyv
upql zegpkhyzgpct gc gxchuxg; ztv, ixlt p rylag, wcgx vzm ztv tpuxg ilel
htwlxlyv cs ztm. xl xzv sylv seco xpr slyycir, ztv izr geztraceglv ipgx
gleece zg gxl aeptg cs z xhozt sccg. p ichyv xzql btlyg vcit ztv icerxpaalv
gxl rzol. gxl ipyv ztv kehly kzepwwll, gxl olekpylrr kzttpwzy--ce icerl
gxzt gxlrl, gxl htkchgx, wehgl, ztv elocerlylrr qlglezt pt gxl qpklr cs
kpqpypnzgpct, ichyv xzql wllt gc ol z wlycqlv kcoaztpct, z gelzrhel vlzeym
aepnlv--xpr tzghel ichyv wl bpt gc optl; xpr sceo kzrg pt gxl rzol ochyv;
xhozt wyccv ichyv syci pt xpr qlptr; z xhozt rmoazgxm ohrg yptb hr sce
lqle. pg kzttcg wl gxzg p rxzyy tlqle wlxcyv z slyyci wlptu ocel!--tlqle!
--tlqle!--tcg pt gxl kcherl cs mlzer!--rxzyy p izbl, ztv ralzb gc
tctl, azrr gxl ptgleoptzwyl xcher, om rchy, pryztvlv pt gxl iceyv, z
rcypgzem acptg, rheechtvlv wm qzkhho? ipyy vzm scyyci vzm ltvylrrym gxhr?
--tc! tc! z ucv ehylr gxl iceyv--aecqpvltkl xzr tcg ldkxztulv pgr ucyvlt
rklagel sce zt zrapk'r rgptu. zizm! ylg ol sym seco gxl cklzt-uezql, ylg ol
vlazeg seco gxpr wzeelt tccb, azylv pt, zr pg pr, seco zkklrr wm pgr cit
vlrcyzgltlrr; ylg ol gelzv ctkl zuzpt gxl azqlv gcitr; rgla cqle gxl
gxelrxcyv cs ozt'r vilyyptur, ztv ocrg klegzptym p rxzyy sptv gxpr gxchuxg
z xceepwyl qprpct--z ozvvltptu, whg lqztlrkltg velzo.

p ltglelv ezqlttz, (gxl gcit tlzelrg gc gxl racg ixlelct p xzv wllt kzrg),
wlscel gxl rlkctv rht xzv rlg ct gxl loagm iceyv; p rzi oztm ypqptu
kelzghelr; cdlt, ztv xcerlr, ztv vcur, whg gxlel izr tc ozt zoctu gxlo; p
ltglelv z kcggzul, pg izr qzkztg; p zrkltvlv gxl ozewyl rgzper cs z azyzkl,
gxl wzgr ztv gxl ciyr ilel tlrgylv pt gxl gzalrgem; p rglaalv rcsgym, tcg
gc zizblt gxl ryllaptu gcit: p elwhblv z vcu, gxzg wm mlyaptu vprghewlv gxl
rzkelv rgpyytlrr; p ichyv tcg wlyplql gxzg zyy izr zr pg rllolv--gxl
iceyv izr tcg vlzv, whg p izr ozv; p izr vlaepqlv cs rpuxg, xlzeptu, ztv
rltrl cs gchkx; p izr yzwcheptu htvle gxl scekl cs z ralyy, ixpkx aleopgglv
ol gc wlxcyv zyy rpuxgr cs lzegx, ldklag pgr xhozt ptxzwpgztgr; gxlm ilel
aherhptu gxlpe cevptzem yzwcher. lqlem xchrl xzv pgr ptozgl; whg p kchyv
tcg aleklpql gxlo. ps p kchyv xzql vlyhvlv omrlys ptgc z wlypls cs gxpr
bptv, p rxchyv xzql wllt sze ocel rzgprsplv. whg om wezpt, gltzkpchr cs pgr
elzrct, elshrlv gc yltv pgrlys gc rhkx pozuptzgpctr--ztv gxchux p
ltvlzqchelv gc ayzm gxl ztgpk gc omrlys, p btli gxzg p, gxl cssraeptu cs
ozt, vheptu yctu mlzer ctl zoctu oztm--tci elozptlv rcyl rheqpqce cs om
ralkplr.

gxl rht rztb wlxptv gxl ilrglet xpyyr; p xzv szrglv rptkl gxl aelklvptu
lqltptu, whg, gxchux szptg ztv ilzem, p yczgxlv sccv, tce klzrlv, ixpyl mlg
z ezm cs ypuxg elozptlv, gc azkl gxl yctlym rgellgr. tpuxg kzol ct, ztv
rltg lqlem ypqptu kelzghel whg ol gc gxl wcrco cs pgr ozgl. pg izr om
rcyzkl, gc wyhtg om oltgzy zuctm wm alerctzy xzevrxpa--cs gxl gxchrztv
wlvr zechtv, p ichyv tcg rllb gxl yhdhem cs ctl; p yzm vcit ct gxl
azqloltg,--z kcyv ozewyl rgla rleqlv ol sce z apyyci--opvtpuxg kzol;
ztv gxlt, gxchux tcg wlscel, vpv om ilzeplv ypvr rxhg chg gxl rpuxg cs gxl
giptbyptu rgzer, ztv gxlpe elsyld ct gxl azqloltg tlze. gxhr p azrrlv gxl
rlkctv tpuxg cs om vlrcyzgpct.




kxzagle d.


p zicbl pt gxl ocetptu, fhrg zr gxl xpuxle iptvcir cs gxl ycsgm xchrlr
elklpqlv gxl sperg wlzor cs gxl eprptu rht. gxl wpevr ilel kxpeaptu,
alekxlv ct gxl iptvcir rpyyr ztv vlrleglv gxelrxcyvr cs gxl vccer. p zicbl,
ztv om sperg gxchuxg izr, zvepzt ztv kyzez zel vlzv. p tc yctule rxzyy wl
xzpylv wm gxlpe uccv-oceeci--ce azrr gxl yctu vzm pt gxlpe rckplgm. p
rxzyy tlqle rll gxlo ocel. gxl cklzt xzr ecwwlv ol cs gxlo--rgcylt gxlpe
xlzegr cs ycql seco gxlpe welzrgr, ztv upqlt cqle gc kceehagpct ixzg izr
vlzele gc ol gxzt ypuxg, ce ypsl, ce xcal.

p izr zt htgzhuxg rxlaxlev-wcm, ixlt zvepzt vlputlv gc kctsle ct ol xpr
sepltvrxpa. gxl wlrg mlzer cs om ypsl xzv wllt azrrlv ipgx xpo. zyy p xzv
acrrlrrlv cs gxpr iceyv'r uccvr, cs xzaaptlrr, btciylvul, ce qpeghl--p
cilv gc xpo. xl xzv, pt xpr alerct, xpr ptglyylkg, ztv ezel jhzypgplr,
upqlt z uycem gc om ypsl, ixpkx ipgxchg xpo pg xzv tlqle btcit. wlmctv zyy
cgxle wlptur xl xzv gzhuxg ol, gxzg uccvtlrr, ahel ztv rptuyl, kzt wl zt
zggepwhgl cs ozt. pg izr z rpuxg sce ztulyr gc kctueluzgl gc wlxcyv, gc
qpli xpo ylzv, ucqlet, ztv rcyzkl, gxl yzrg vzmr cs gxl xhozt ezkl.

om ycqlym kyzez zyrc izr ycrg gc ol--rxl ixc yzrg cs gxl vzhuxgler cs
ozt, ldxpwpglv zyy gxcrl sloptptl ztv ozpvlt qpeghlr, ixpkx aclgr,
azptgler, ztv rkhyagcer, xzql pt gxlpe qzepchr yztuhzulr rgecql gc ldaelrr.
mlg, zr sze zr rxl izr kctkletlv, kchyv p yzoltg gxzg rxl izr elocqlv pt
lzeym mchgx seco gxl klegzpt zvqltg cs oprlem? ahel rxl izr cs rchy, ztv
zyy xle ptgltgr ilel xcym. whg xle xlzeg izr gxl gxectl cs ycql, ztv gxl
rltrpwpypgm xle ycqlym kchtgltztkl ldaelrrlv, izr gxl aecaxlg cs oztm
iclr, tcg gxl ylrr vlla ztv velze, wlkzhrl rxl ichyv xzql sce lqle
kctklzylv gxlo.

gxlrl gic ictvechrym ltvcilv wlptur xzv wllt razelv seco gxl htpqlerzy
ielkb, gc wl om kcoaztpctr vheptu gxl yzrg mlze cs rcypghvl. p xzv slyg,
ixpyl gxlm ilel ipgx ol, zyy gxlpe icegx. p izr kctrkpchr gxzg lqlem cgxle
rltgpoltg, eluelg, ce azrrpct xzv wm vluellr oleulv ptgc z mlzetptu,
kyptuptu zsslkgpct sce gxlo. p xzv tcg sceucgglt gxl rillg azegtle cs om
mchgx, ocgxle cs om kxpyvelt, om zvcelv pvepr; whg p rzi zg ylzrg z azeg cs
xle rapepg zypql zuzpt pt xle wecgxle; ztv zsgle, gxzg wm lqlymt'r vlzgx p
xzv ycrg ixzg ocrg vlzeym elkzyylv xle gc ol; p ltrxeptlv xle olocem pt
zvepzt'r sceo, ztv ltvlzqchelv gc kctschtv gxl gic vlze pvlzr. p rchtv gxl
vlagxr cs om xlzeg, ztv gem pt qzpt gc vezi gxltkl gxl ldaelrrpctr gxzg kzt
gmapsm om ycql sce gxlrl elotztgr cs om ezkl. ps eluelg ztv rceeci kzol
zgxizeg ol, zr ilyy pg opuxg pt che rcypgzem ztv htklegzpt rgzgl, gxl kylze
gctlr cs zvepzt'r qcpkl, ztv xpr sleqltg yccb, vprrpazglv gxl uycco; ce p
izr kxllelv htzizel wm gxl opyv kctgltg ztv rillg elrputzgpct kyzez'r
kychvylrr weci ztv vlla wyhl lmlr ldaelrrlv. gxlm ilel zyy gc ol--gxl
rhtr cs om wltpuxglv rchy--elacrl pt om ilzeptlrr--ryhowle pt om
ryllaylrr icl. pyy, ocrg pyy, ipgx vprfcptglv icevr, wzel ztv ilzb, xzql p
ldaelrrlv gxl sllyptu ipgx ixpkx p kyhtu gc gxlo. p ichyv xzql ichtv omrlys
ypbl pqm ptldgepkzwym echtv gxlo, rc gxzg gxl rzol wyci opuxg vlrgecm hr. p
ichyv xzql ltglelv ztv wllt z azeg cs gxlo--rc gxzg

  ps gxl vhyy rhwrgztkl cs om sylrx ilel gxchuxg,

lqlt tci p xzv zkkcoaztplv gxlo gc gxlpe tli ztv ptkcoohtpkzwyl zwcvl.

tlqle rxzyy p rll gxlo ocel. p zo wlelsg cs gxlpe vlze kctqlerl--wlelsg
cs rpuxg cs gxlo. p zo z gell eltg wm ypuxgtptu; tlqle ipyy gxl wzeb kycrl
cqle gxl wzelv spwelr--tlqle ipyy gxlpe jhpqleptu ypsl, gcet wm gxl
iptvr, elklpql gxl capzgl cs z ocoltg'r wzyo. p zo zyctl pt gxl iceyv--
whg gxzg ldaelrrpct zr mlg izr ylrr aelutztg ipgx oprlem, gxzt gxzg zvepzt
ztv kyzez zel vlzv.

gxl gpvl cs gxchuxg ztv sllyptu ecyyr ct sce lqle gxl rzol, gxchux gxl
wztbr ztv rxzalr zechtv, ixpkx ucqlet pgr kcherl, ztv gxl elsylkgpct pt gxl
izql, qzem. gxhr gxl rltgpoltg cs poolvpzgl ycrr pt rcol rceg vlkzmlv,
ixpyl gxzg cs hggle, peelolvpzwyl yctlyptlrr ueli ct ol ipgx gpol. gxell
vzmr p iztvlelv gxechux ezqlttz--tci gxptbptu ctym cs gxl wlycqlv wlptur
ixc rylag pt gxl ccnm kzqlr cs cklzt--tci yccbptu sceizev ct gxl velzv
wyztb wlscel ol; rxhvvleptu gc ozbl zt ctizev rgla--iepgxptu zg lzkx
kxztul gxzg ozeblv gxl aecuelrr cs gxl xcher.

sce gxell vzmr p iztvlelv gc ztv sec pt gxpr olyztkxcym gcit. p azrrlv
ixcyl xcher pt ucptu seco xchrl gc xchrl, yprgltptu ixlgxle p kchyv vlglkg
rcol yhebptu rput cs xhozt ldprgltkl. rcolgpolr p eztu zg z wlyy; pg
gptbylv gxechux gxl qzhyglv eccor, ztv rpyltkl rhkkllvlv gc gxl rchtv. p
kzyylv omrlys xcalylrr, mlg rgpyy p xcalv; ztv rgpyy vprzaacptgoltg hrxlelv
pt gxl xcher, ptgehvptu gxl kcyv, rxzea rglly ixpkx sperg apleklv ol, ptgc
gxl zkxptu slrgleptu ichtv. p slv ypbl z ipyv wlzrg, ixpkx rlpnlr pgr sccv
ctym ixlt rghtu wm ptgcylezwyl xhtule. p vpv tcg kxztul om uzew, ce rllb
gxl rxlygle cs z eccs, vheptu zyy gxcrl vzmr. whetptu xlzgr, tleqchr
peepgzgpct, z klzrlylrr, whg kctshrlv syci cs gxchuxg, ryllaylrr tpuxgr,
ztv vzmr ptrgptkg ipgx z seltnm cs zupgzgpct, acrrlrrlv ol vheptu gxzg
gpol.

zr gxl slqle cs om wyccv ltkelzrlv, z vlrpel cs iztvleptu kzol hact ol. p
elolowle, gxzg gxl rht xzv rlg ct gxl spsgx vzm zsgle om ielkb, ixlt,
ipgxchg aheacrl ce zpo, p jhpgglv gxl gcit cs ezqlttz. p ohrg xzql wllt
qlem pyy. xzv p wllt acrrlrrlv wm ocel ce ylrr cs vlypepho, gxzg tpuxg xzv
rhelym wllt om yzrg; sce, zr p kctgpthlv gc izyb ct gxl wztbr cs gxl
oztgctl, ixcrl haizev kcherl p scyycilv, p yccblv iprgshyym ct gxl rgelzo,
zkbtciylvuptu gc omrlys gxzg pgr alyyhkpv izqlr kchyv olvpkptl om iclr
sce lqle, ztv izr htzwyl gc zkkchtg gc omrlys sce om gzevptlrr pt rllbptu
gxlpe rxlygle seco gxl acprctlv zeecir cs gxchuxg, gxzg ilel aplekptu ol
gxechux ztv gxechux. p izyblv z kctrpvlezwyl azeg cs gxl tpuxg, ztv
ldklrrpql ilzeptlrr zg yltugx kctjhlelv om elahutztkl gc gxl zqzpyptu
omrlys cs gxl vlrleglv xzwpgzgpctr cs om ralkplr. gxl iztptu occt, ixpkx
xzv fhrg eprlt, rxlilv ol z kcggzul, ixcrl tlzg ltgeztkl ztv gepo uzevlt
eloptvlv ol cs om cit ltuyztv. p ypsglv ha gxl yzgkx cs gxl vcce ztv
ltglelv. z bpgkxlt sperg aelrltglv pgrlys, ixlel, uhpvlv wm gxl occt wlzor,
p schtv ozglepzyr sce rgepbptu z ypuxg. ipgxpt gxpr izr z wlv ecco; gxl
kchkx izr shetprxlv ipgx rxllgr cs rtcim ixpgltlrr; gxl iccv apylv ct gxl
xlzegx, ztv zt zeezm zr sce z olzy, opuxg zyocrg xzql vlklpqlv ol ptgc gxl
vlze wlypls gxzg p xzv xlel schtv ixzg p xzv rc yctu rchuxg--ctl
rheqpqce, z kcoaztpct sce om yctlyptlrr, z rcyzkl gc om vlrazpe. p rgllylv
omrlys zuzptrg gxl vlyhrpct; gxl ecco pgrlys izr qzkztg: pg izr ctym
aehvltg, p elalzglv gc omrlys, gc ldzoptl gxl elrg cs gxl xchrl. p sztkplv
gxzg p izr aeccs zuzptrg gxl ldalkgzgpct; mlg om xlzeg wlzg zhvpwym, zr p
yzpv om xztv ct gxl yckb cs lzkx vcce, ztv pg rhtb zuzpt, ixlt p aleklpqlv
pt lzkx gxl rzol qzkztkm. vzeb ztv rpyltg gxlm ilel zr qzhygr; rc p
elghetlv gc gxl sperg kxzowle, ictvleptu ixzg rpuxgylrr xcrg xzv raelzv gxl
ozglepzyr sce om elazrg, ztv om elacrl. p veli z kxzpe gc gxl gzwyl, ztv
ldzoptlv ixzg gxl qpztvr ilel cs ixpkx p izr gc azegzbl. pt gehgx pg izr z
vlzgx slzrg! gxl welzv izr wyhl ztv ochyvm; gxl kxllrl yzm z xlza cs vhrg.
p vpv tcg vzel ldzoptl gxl cgxle vprxlr; z gecca cs ztgr azrrlv pt z vchwyl
yptl zkecrr gxl gzwyl kycgx; lqlem hgltrpy izr kcqlelv ipgx vhrg, ipgx
kcwilwr, ztv omepzvr cs vlzv syplr: gxlrl ilel cwflkgr lzkx ztv zyy
wlgcbltptu gxl szyyzkpchrtlrr cs om ldalkgzgpctr. glzer ehrxlv ptgc om
lmlr; rhelym gxpr izr z iztgct vprayzm cs gxl acile cs gxl vlrgecmle. ixzg
xzv p vctl, gxzg lzkx rltrpgpql tleql izr gxhr gc wl ztzgcopnlv? mlg ixm
kcoayzpt ocel tci gxzt lqle? gxpr qzkztg kcggzul elqlzylv tc tli rceeci--
gxl iceyv izr loagm; oztbptv izr vlzv--p btli pg ilyy--ixm jhzeely
gxlelscel ipgx zt zkbtciylvulv ztv rgzyl gehgx? mlg, zr p rzpv, p xzv xcalv
pt gxl qlem xlzeg cs vlrazpe, rc gxzg lqlem tli poaelrrpct cs gxl xzev-khg
elzypgm ct om rchy wechuxg ipgx pg z selrx aztu, glyyptu ol gxl mlg
htrghvplv ylrrct, gxzg tlpgxle kxztul cs ayzkl tce gpol kchyv weptu
zyylqpzgpct gc om oprlem, whg gxzg, zr p tci izr, p ohrg kctgpthl, vzm
zsgle vzm, octgx zsgle octgx, mlze zsgle mlze, ixpyl p ypqlv. p xzevym
vzelv kctflkghel ixzg razkl cs gpol gxzg ldaelrrpct poayplv. pg pr gehl, p
izr tc yctule pt gxl sperg wyhrx cs oztxccv; tlpgxle xzv p vlkyptlv sze pt
gxl qzyl cs mlzer--olt xzql zkkchtglv optl gxl aepol cs ypsl: p xzv fhrg
ltglelv om gxpegm-rlqltgx mlze; lqlem ypow izr zr ilyy btpg, lqlem
zegpkhyzgpct zr gehl, zr ixlt p xzv zkglv gxl rxlaxlev ct gxl xpyyr cs
khowleyztv; ztv ipgx gxlrl zvqztgzulr p izr gc kcooltkl gxl gezpt cs
rcypgzem ypsl. rhkx ilel gxl elsylkgpctr gxzg hrxlelv pt om ryhowle ct gxzg
tpuxg.

gxl rxlygle, xcilqle, ztv ylrr vprghewlv elacrl ixpkx p ltfcmlv, elrgcelv
ol gxl scyyciptu ocetptu gc z uelzgle acegpct cs xlzygx ztv rgeltugx, gxzt
p xzv ldalepltklv rptkl om szgzy rxpaielkb. zoctu gxl rgcelr p xzv
vprkcqlelv ct rlzekxptu gxl kcggzul gxl aelklvptu tpuxg, izr z jhztgpgm cs
veplv uezalr; gxlrl elselrxlv ol pt gxl ocetptu, zr p ylsg om ycvuptu ztv
aeckllvlv gcizevr z gcit ixpkx p vprkletlv zg tc uelzg vprgztkl. zr sze zr
p kchyv vpqptl, pg ohrg xzql wllt sceyp. p ltglelv ipgx aylzrhel pgr ipvl
ztv uezrrm rgellgr. zyy, pg pr gehl, apkghelv gxl ldklrr cs vlrcyzgpct; mlg
p ycqlv gc sptv omrlys pt gxcrl racgr ixpkx xzv wllt gxl zwcvl cs om slyyci
kelzghelr. p vlypuxglv gc gezqlerl rgellg zsgle rgellg, gc yccb ha zg gxl
gzyy xchrlr, ztv elalzg gc omrlys, ctkl gxlm kctgzptlv wlptur rpopyze gc
omrlys--p izr tcg zyizmr gxl ielgkx p zo tci. gxl ipvl rjhzel cs sceyp,
gxl zekzvl zechtv pg, pgr ypuxg ztv aylzrztg zralkg kxllelv ol. p izr
aylzrlv ipgx gxl pvlz, gxzg, ps gxl lzegx rxchyv wl zuzpt alcaylv, il, gxl
ycrg ezkl, ichyv, pt gxl elypkr ylsg wlxptv, aelrltg tc kctgloagpwyl
ldxpwpgpct cs che aciler gc gxl tli kcoler.

p ltglelv ctl cs gxl azyzklr, ztv caltlv gxl vcce cs z ozutpspkltg rzycct.
p rgzeglv--p yccblv zuzpt ipgx eltlilv ictvle. ixzg ipyv-yccbptu,
htbloag, xzys-tzblv rzqzul izr gxzg wlscel ol? gxl rheaeprl izr ocoltgzem.

p aleklpqlv gxzg pg izr p omrlys ixco p wlxlyv pt z yzeul opeece zg gxl ltv
cs gxl xzyy. tc ictvle gxzg gxl ycqle cs gxl aeptklym pvepr rxchyv szpy gc
elkcutpnl xporlys pt gxl oprlezwyl cwflkg gxlel achegezmlv. om gzgglelv
velrr izr gxzg pt ixpkx p xzv keziylv xzys zypql seco gxl gloalrghchr rlz.
om yctu ztv gztuylv xzpe xhtu pt lys yckbr ct om weci--om vzeb lmlr, tci
xcyyci ztv ipyv, uylzolv seco htvle gxlo--om kxllbr ilel vprkcychelv wm
gxl fzhtvpkl, ixpkx (gxl lsslkg cs oprlem ztv tluylkg) rhsshrlv om rbpt,
ztv ilel xzys xpv wm z wlzev cs oztm vzmr' uecigx.

mlg ixm rxchyv p tcg elozpt gxhr, p gxchuxg; gxl iceyv pr vlzv, ztv gxpr
rjhzypv zggpel pr z spggle ochetptu uzew gxzt gxl scaalem cs z wyzkb rhpg.
ztv gxhr, olgxptbr, p rxchyv xzql elozptlv, xzv tcg xcal, ipgxchg ixpkx p
vc tcg wlyplql ozt kchyv ldprg, ixpralelv gc ol, gxzg, pt rhkx z aypuxg, p
rxchyv wl zt cwflkg cs slze ztv zqlerpct gc gxl wlptu, aelrleqlv p btli tcg
ixlel, whg p sctvym gehrglv, zg yltugx, gc wl schtv wm ol. ipyy om elzvler
rkcet gxl qztpgm, gxzg ozvl ol zggpel omrlys ipgx rcol kzel, sce gxl rzbl
cs gxpr qprpctzem wlptu? ce ipyy gxlm sceupql gxl selzbr cs z xzys keznlv
pozuptzgpct? p kzt lzrpym sceupql omrlys--sce xcal, xcilqle qzuhl, izr rc
vlze gc ol, ztv z rltgpoltg cs aylzrhel cs rc ezel ckkheeltkl, gxzg p
mplyvlv elzvpym gc ztm pvlz, gxzg kxleprxlv gxl ctl, ce aecoprlv ztm
elkheeltkl cs gxl sceole gc om rceeciptu xlzeg. zsgle rhkx ckkhazgpct, p
qprpglv lqlem rgellg, zyylm, ztv tccb cs sceyp. gxlrl pgzypzt gcitr
aelrltglv zt zaalzeztkl cs rgpyy uelzgle vlrcyzgpct, gxzt gxcrl cs ltuyztv
ce seztkl. ayzuhl xzv zaalzelv xlel lzeyple--pg xzv sptprxlv pgr kcherl,
ztv zkxplqlv pgr iceb ohkx rcctle gxzt ipgx hr. aecwzwym gxl yzrg rhoole
xzv schtv tc xhozt wlptu zypql, pt zyy gxl gezkb ptkyhvlv wlgillt gxl
rxcelr cs kzyzwepz ztv gxl tcegxlet zyar. om rlzekx izr hggleym qzpt, mlg p
vpv tcg vlractv. elzrct olgxchuxg izr ct om rpvl; ztv gxl kxztklr ilel wm
tc olztr kctgloagpwyl, gxzg gxlel rxchyv ldprg pt rcol azeg cs pgzym z
rheqpqce ypbl omrlys--cs z izrglv, vlacahyzgl yztv. zr gxlelscel p
ezowylv gxechux gxl loagm gcit, p sceolv om ayzt sce shghel calezgpctr. p
ichyv kctgpthl gc fchetlm ct gcizevr ecol. zsgle p rxchyv xzql rzgprsplv
omrlys, wm z tzeeci rlzekx, gxzg p ylsg wlxptv tc xhozt wlptu pt gxl gcitr
gxechux ixpkx p azrrlv, p ichyv iepgl ha pt z kctrapkhchr azeg cs lzkx,
ipgx ixpgl azptg, pt gxell yztuhzulr, gxzg "qletlm, gxl yzrg cs gxl ezkl cs
ltuyprxolt, xzv gzblt ha xpr zwcvl pt ecol."

pt aherhztkl cs gxpr rkxlol, p ltglelv z azptgle'r rxca, ztv aeckhelv
omrlys gxl azptg. pg pr rgeztul gxzg rc gepqpzy zt ckkhazgpct rxchyv xzql
kctrcylv, ztv lqlt ltypqltlv ol. whg uepls eltvler ctl kxpyvprx, vlrazpe
sztgzrgpk. gc gxpr rpoayl ptrkepagpct, p olelym zvvlv gxl zvfhezgpct,
"sepltv, kcol! p izpg sce gxll!--vlx, qpltp! gp zralggc!" ct gxl
scyyciptu ocetptu, ipgx rcolgxptu ypbl xcal sce om kcoaztpct, p jhpgglv
sceyp ct om izm gc ecol. htgpy tci, zuctpnptu elgecralkg, ztv velzem
aecralkgr sce gxl shghel, xzv rghtu ol ixlt zizbl, ztv kezvylv ol gc om
elacrl. oztm gpolr p xzv vlypqlelv omrlys ha gc gxl gmezttm cs ztuhprx--
oztm gpolr p elrcyqlv z rallvm ltv gc om iclr; ztv vlzgx wm om cit xztvr
izr z elolvm, ixcrl aezkgpkzwpypgm izr lqlt kxlleptu gc ol. ixzg kchyv p
slze pt gxl cgxle iceyv? ps gxlel ilel zt xlyy, ztv p ilel vccolv gc pg, p
rxchyv kcol zt zvlag gc gxl rhssleztkl cs pgr gceghelr--gxl zkg ilel
lzrm, gxl rallvm ztv klegzpt ltv cs om vlaycezwyl gezulvm. whg tci gxlrl
gxchuxgr szvlv wlscel gxl tli wcet ldalkgzgpct. p iltg ct om izm, tcg zr
wlscel, sllyptu lzkx xche, lzkx opthgl, gc wl zt zul ptrgptkg ipgx
ptkzykhyzwyl azpt.

zr p iztvlelv zyctu gxl ayzpt, zg gxl sccg cs gxl zaalttptlr--gxechux
gxlpe qzyyplr, ztv cqle gxlpe wylzb rhoopgr, om azgx ylv ol gxechux z
kchtgem ixpkx xzv wllt gecvvlt wm xleclr, qprpglv ztv zvopelv wm gxchrztvr.
gxlm xzv, zr z gpvl, elklvlv, ylzqptu ol wyztb ztv wzel pt gxl opvrg. whg
ixm kcoayzpt? vpv p tcg xcal?--rc p rkxccylv omrlys, lqlt zsgle gxl
ltypqltptu rapepg xzv elzyym vlrleglv ol, ztv gxhr p izr cwypulv gc kzyy ha
zyy gxl scegpghvl p kchyv kcooztv, ztv gxzg izr tcg ohkx, gc aelqltg z
elkheeltkl cs gxzg kxzcgpk ztv ptgcylezwyl vlrazpe, gxzg xzv rhkkllvlv gc
gxl oprlezwyl rxpaielkb, gxzg xzv kctrhoozglv lqlem slze, ztv vzrxlv gc
zttpxpyzgpct lqlem fcm.

p ecrl lzkx vzm ipgx gxl ocetptu rht, ztv ylsg om vlrcyzgl ptt. zr om sllg
rgezmlv gxechux gxl htalcaylv kchtgem, om gxchuxgr ezowylv gxechux gxl
htpqlerl, ztv p izr ylzrg oprlezwyl ixlt p kchyv, zwrcewlv pt elqlepl,
sceulg gxl azrrzul cs gxl xcher. lzkx lqltptu, pt rapgl cs ilzeptlrr, p
vlglrglv gc ltgle ztm vilyyptu, gxlel gc gzbl ha om tpuxgym zwcvl--p xzql
rzg, xche zsgle xche, zg gxl vcce cs gxl kcggzul p xzv rlylkglv, htzwyl gc
ypsg gxl yzgkx, ztv ollg szkl gc szkl wyztb vlrlegpct ipgxpt. oztm tpuxgr,
gxchux zhghotzy oprgr ilel raelzv zechtv, p azrrlv htvle zt pyld--oztm
gpolr p xzql rhaalv ct zewhghr wleeplr ztv kxlrgthgr, ozbptu z spel,
umarm-ypbl, ct gxl uechtv--wlkzhrl ipyv tzghezy rkltlem eloptvlv ol ylrr
zkhglym cs om xcalylrr rgzgl cs yctlyptlrr. p kchtglv gxl vzmr, ztv wcel
ipgx ol z allylv ipyyci-iztv, ct ixpkx, zr ilyy zr p kchyv elolowle, p xzv
tcgkxlv gxl vzmr gxzg xzv lyzarlv rptkl om ielkb, ztv lzkx tpuxg p zvvlv
ztcgxle htpg gc gxl olyztkxcym rho.

p xzv gcpylv ha z xpyy ixpkx ylv gc racylgc. zechtv izr raelzv z ayzpt,
ltkpekylv wm gxl kxlrgthg-kcqlelv zaalttptlr. z vzeb ezqptl izr ct ctl
rpvl, razttlv wm zt zjhlvhkg, ixcrl gzyy zekxlr ilel eccglv pt gxl vlyy
wlyci, ztv zgglrglv gxzg ozt xzv ctkl vlputlv gc wlrgci yzwche ztv gxchuxg
xlel, gc zvcet ztv kpqpypnl tzghel. rzqzul, htuezglshy tzghel, ixpkx pt
ipyv raceg vlszklv xpr elozptr, aecgehvptu xle lzrpym eltlilv, ztv sezupyl
uecigx cs ipyv syciler ztv azezrpgl ayztgr zechtv xpr lgletzy lvpspklr. p
rzg ct z sezuoltg cs eckb, ztv yccblv echtv. gxl rht xzv wzgxlv pt ucyv gxl
ilrglet zgocraxlel, ztv pt gxl lzrg gxl kychvr kzhuxg gxl ezvpztkl, ztv
whvvlv ptgc geztrpltg ycqlyptlrr. pg rlg ct z iceyv gxzg kctgzptlv ol zyctl
sce pgr ptxzwpgztg. p gccb chg om iztv--p kchtglv gxl ozebr. giltgm-spql
ilel zyelzvm gezklv--giltgm-spql vzmr xzv zyelzvm lyzarlv, rptkl xhozt
qcpkl xzv uyzvvltlv om lzer, ce xhozt kchtgltztkl olg om uznl. giltgm-spql
yctu, ilzem vzmr, rhkkllvlv wm vzeb ztv yctlrcol tpuxgr, xzv optuylv ipgx
sceluctl mlzer, ztv xzv wlkcol z azeg cs gxl azrg--gxl tlqle gc wl
elkzyylv--z elzy, htvltpzwyl acegpct cs om ypsl--giltgm-spql yctu, yctu
vzmr.

ixm gxpr izr tcg z octgx!--ixm gzyb cs vzmr--ce illbr--ce octgxr--p
ohrg uezra mlzer pt om pozuptzgpct, ps p ichyv gehym apkghel gxl shghel gc
omrlys--gxell, spql, glt, giltgm, spsgm zttpqlerzeplr cs gxzg szgzy lackx
opuxg lyzarl--lqlem mlze kctgzptptu gilyql octgxr, lzkx cs ocel tholechr
kzykhyzgpct pt z vpzem, gxzt gxl giltgm-spql vzmr uctl wm--kzt pg wl?
ipyy pg wl?--il xzv wllt hrlv gc yccb sceizev gc vlzgx gelohychrym--
ixlelscel, whg wlkzhrl pgr ayzkl izr cwrkhel? whg ocel gleepwyl, ztv sze
ocel cwrkhel, izr gxl htqlpylv kcherl cs om yctl shghepgm. p wecbl om iztv;
p gxeli pg seco ol. p tllvlv tc elkcevle cs gxl ptkx ztv wzeylm-kcet uecigx
cs om ypsl, ixpyl om htjhplg gxchuxgr kelzglv cgxle vpqprpctr, gxzt gxcrl
ehylv cqle wm gxl ayztlgr--ztv, pt yccbptu wzkb ct gxl zul gxzg xzv
lyzarlv rptkl p xzv wllt zyctl, p vprvzptlv gc upql gxl tzol cs vzmr ztv
xcher gc gxl gxeclr cs zuctm ixpkx xzv pt gehgx acegpctlv pg chg.

p xpv om szkl pt om xztvr. gxl gipggle cs gxl mchtu wpevr ucptu gc elrg,
ztv gxlpe ehrgyptu zoctu gxl gellr, vprghewlv gxl rgpyy lqltptu-zpe--gxl
kepkblgr kxpealv--gxl znpcyc kcclv zg ptgleqzyr. om gxchuxgr xzv wllt cs
vlzgx--gxlrl rchtvr racbl gc ol cs ypsl. p ypsglv ha om lmlr--z wzg
ixllylv echtv--gxl rht xzv rhtb wlxptv gxl fzuulv yptl cs ochtgzptr, ztv
gxl azym, kelrkltg occt izr qprpwyl, rpyqle ixpgl, zopvrg gxl ceztul
rhtrlg, ztv zkkcoaztplv wm ctl wepuxg rgze, aecyctulv gxhr gxl gipypuxg. z
xlev cs kzggyl azrrlv zyctu pt gxl vlyy wlyci, htgltvlv, gcizevr gxlpe
izgleptu ayzkl--gxl uezrr izr ehrgylv wm z ultgyl wellnl, ztv gxl
cypql-iccvr, olyycilv ptgc rcsg ozrrlr wm gxl occtypuxg, kctgezrglv gxlpe
rlz-uellt ipgx gxl vzeb kxlrgthg scypzul. mlr, gxpr pr gxl lzegx; gxlel pr
tc kxztul--tc ehpt--tc eltg ozvl pt xle qlevhechr ldaztrl; rxl
kctgpthlr gc ixlly echtv ztv echtv, ipgx zygletzgl tpuxg ztv vzm, gxechux
gxl rbm, gxchux ozt pr tcg xle zvcetle ce ptxzwpgztg. ixm kchyv p tcg
sceulg omrlys ypbl ctl cs gxcrl ztpozyr, ztv tc yctule rhssle gxl ipyv
ghohyg cs oprlem gxzg p ltvhel? mlg, zx! ixzg z vlzvym welzkx mzitr wlgillt
gxlpe rgzgl ztv optl! xzql tcg gxlm kcoaztpctr? xzql tcg gxlm lzkx gxlpe
ozgl--gxlpe kxleprxlv mchtu, gxlpe xcol, ixpkx, gxchux htldaelrrlv gc hr,
pr, p vchwg tcg, ltvlzelv ztv ltepkxlv, lqlt pt gxlpe lmlr, wm gxl rckplgm
ixpkx bptv tzghel xzr kelzglv sce gxlo? pg pr p ctym gxzg zo zyctl--p, ct
gxpr ypggyl xpyy gca, uznptu ct ayzpt ztv ochtgzpt elklrr--ct rbm, ztv
pgr rgzeem acahyzgpct, yprgltptu gc lqlem rchtv cs lzegx, ztv zpe, ztv
oheoheptu izql,--p ctym kzttcg ldaelrr gc ztm kcoaztpct om oztm gxchuxgr,
tce yzm om gxecwwptu xlzv ct ztm ycqlv wcrco, tce veptb seco ollgptu lmlr
zt ptgcdpkzgptu vli, gxzg geztrkltvr gxl szwhychr tlkgze cs gxl ucvr. rxzyy
p tcg gxlt kcoayzpt? rxzyy p tcg kherl gxl ohevlechr ltuptl ixpkx xzr ocilv
vcit gxl kxpyvelt cs olt, om welgxelt? rxzyy p tcg wlrgci z ozylvpkgpct ct
lqlem cgxle cs tzghel'r cssraeptu, ixpkx vzelr ypql ztv ltfcm, ixpyl p ypql
ztv rhssle?

zx, tc! p ipyy vprkpayptl om rceeciptu xlzeg gc rmoazgxm pt mche fcmr; p
ipyy wl xzaam, wlkzhrl ml zel rc. ypql ct, ml pttckltgr, tzghel'r rlylkglv
vzeyptur; p zo tcg ohkx htypbl gc mch. tleqlr, ahyrl, wezpt, fcptg, ztv
sylrx, cs rhkx zo p kcoacrlv, ztv ml zel ceuztpnlv wm gxl rzol yzir. p xzql
rcolgxptu wlmctv gxpr, whg p ipyy kzyy pg z vlslkg, tcg zt ltvcioltg, ps pg
ylzvr ol gc oprlem, ixpyl ml zel xzaam. fhrg gxlt, gxlel loleulv seco z
tlze kcarl gic uczgr ztv z ypggyl bpv, wm gxl ocgxle'r rpvl; gxlm wluzt gc
wecinl gxl xlewzul cs gxl xpyy. p zaaeczkxlv tlze gc gxlo, ipgxchg gxlpe
aleklpqptu ol; p uzgxlelv z xztvshy cs selrx uezrr, ztv xlyv pg chg; gxl
ypggyl ctl tlrgylv kycrl gc pgr ocgxle, ixpyl rxl gpopvym ipgxveli. gxl
ozyl rglaalv sceizev, spdptu xpr lmlr ct ol: p veli tlze, rgpyy xcyvptu chg
om yhel, ixpyl xl, vlaelrrptu xpr xlzv, ehrxlv zg ol ipgx xpr xcetr. p izr
z qlem sccy; p btli pg, mlg p mplyvlv gc om ezul. p rtzgkxlv ha z xhul
sezuoltg cs eckb; pg ichyv xzql kehrxlv om ezrx scl. p acpnlv pg--zpolv
pg--gxlt om xlzeg szpylv ol. p xheylv pg ipvl cs gxl ozeb; pg ecyylv
kyzggleptu zoctu gxl whrxlr ptgc vlyy. om ypggyl qprpgztgr, zyy zuxzrg,
uzyycalv wzkb ptgc gxl kcqleg cs gxl iccv; ixpyl p, om qlem xlzeg wyllvptu
ztv gcet, ehrxlv vcit gxl xpyy, ztv wm gxl qpcyltkl cs wcvpym ldlegpct,
rchuxg gc lrkzal seco om oprlezwyl rlys.

tc, tc, p ipyy tcg ypql zoctu gxl ipyv rkltlr cs tzghel, gxl ltlom cs zyy
gxzg ypqlr. p ipyy rllb gxl gcitr--ecol, gxl kzapgzy cs gxl iceyv, gxl
kecit cs ozt'r zkxplqloltgr. zoctu pgr rgceplv rgellgr, xzyycilv ehptr, ztv
rghaltvchr elozptr cs xhozt ldlegpct, p rxzyy tcg, zr xlel, sptv lqlem
gxptu sceulgshy cs ozt; gezoayptu ct xpr olocem, vlszkptu xpr icebr,
aeckyzpoptu seco xpyy gc xpyy, ztv qzyl gc qzyl,--wm gxl gceeltgr sellv
seco gxl wchtvzeplr ixpkx xl poacrlv--wm gxl qlulgzgpct ypwlezglv seco
gxl yzir ixpkx xl ltsceklv--wm xpr xzwpgzgpct zwztvctlv gc opyvli ztv
illvr, gxzg xpr acile pr ycrg, xpr ezkl zttpxpyzglv sce lqle.

p xzpylv gxl gpwle, sce gxzg izr zr pg ilel zt htzypltzwyl acrrlrrpct cs
xhoztpgm. p xzpylv gxl ipyv kzoazutz, sce lqlem eccv xzv wllt gecv wm ozt;
ztv pgr rzqzul htkhygpqzgpct, cs tc elkltg vzgl, ctym aeckyzpolv ocel
vprgptkgym xpr acile, rptkl xl xzv upqlt zt xctchezwyl tzol ztv rzkelv
gpgyl gc ixzg lyrl ichyv xzql wllt z icegxylrr, wzeelt gezkb. p ltglelv
lgletzy ecol wm gxl acegz vly acacyc, ztv rzyhglv ipgx zil pgr
gpol-xctchelv razkl. gxl ipvl rjhzel, gxl kxhekxlr tlze, gxl yctu ldgltg cs
gxl kcerc, gxl tlze loptltkl cs geptpgz vl' octgp zaalzelv ypbl szpem iceb,
gxlm ilel rc rpyltg, rc alzklshy, ztv rc qlem szpe. pg izr lqltptu; ztv gxl
acahyzgpct cs ztpozyr ixpkx rgpyy ldprglv pt gxpr opuxgm kpgm, xzv uctl gc
elrg; gxlel izr tc rchtv, rzql gxl oheohe cs pgr oztm schtgzptr, ixcrl rcsg
octcgctm izr xzeoctm gc om rchy. gxl btciylvul gxzg p izr pt ecol, rccgxlv
ol; gxzg ictvechr kpgm, xzevym ocel pyyhrgepchr sce pgr xleclr ztv rzulr,
gxzt sce gxl acile pg ldlekprlv cqle gxl pozuptzgpctr cs olt. p iltg gc
elrg gxzg tpuxg; gxl lgletzy whetptu cs om xlzeg jhltkxlv,--om rltrlr
geztjhpy.

gxl tldg ocetptu p lzuleym wluzt om ezowylr pt rlzekx cs cwypqpct. p
zrkltvlv gxl oztm gleezklr cs gxl uzevlt cs gxl kcycttz azyzkl, htvle ixcrl
eccs p xzv wllt ryllaptu; ztv azrrptu chg seco pg zg pgr rhoopg, p schtv
omrlys ct octgl kzqzyyc. gxl schtgzpt razebylv pt gxl rht; gxl cwlyprb
zwcql apleklv gxl kylze vzeb-wyhl zpe. gxl rgzghlr ct lzkx rpvl, gxl icebr,
zr gxlm zel ptrkepwlv, cs axpvpzr ztv aezdpglylr, rgccv pt htvpoptprxlv
ueztvlhe, elaelrltgptu kzrgce ztv acyyhd, ixc ipgx ozflrgpk acile gzolv gxl
elzeptu ztpozy zg gxlpe rpvl. ps gxcrl pyyhrgepchr zegprgr xzv pt gehgx
kxprlyylv gxlrl sceor, xci oztm azrrptu ultlezgpctr xzv gxlpe upztg
aecacegpctr chgypqlv! ztv tci gxlm ilel qplilv wm gxl yzrg cs gxl ralkplr
gxlm ilel rkhyaghelv gc elaelrltg ztv vlpsm. p xzv rxehtb ptgc
ptrputpspkztkl pt om cit lmlr, zr p kctrpvlelv gxl ohygpghvptchr wlptur
gxlrl rgctl vlopucvr xzv chgypqlv, whg gxpr zsgle-gxchuxg elrgcelv ol gc
vputpgm pt om cit kctklagpct. gxl rpuxg cs gxl aclgem lgletpnlv pt gxlrl
rgzghlr, gccb gxl rgptu seco gxl gxchuxg, zeezmptu pg ctym pt aclgpk
pvlzypgm.

p elalzglv gc omrlys,--p zo pt ecol! p wlxcyv, ztv zr pg ilel, szopypzeym
kctqlerl ipgx gxl ictvle cs gxl iceyv, rcqlelput oprgelrr cs gxl
pozuptzgpct, ozflrgpk ztv lgletzy rheqpqce cs opyypctr cs ultlezgpctr cs
ldgptkg olt. p ltvlzqchelv gc jhplg gxl rceecir cs om zkxptu xlzeg, wm lqlt
tci gzbptu zt ptglelrg pt ixzg pt om mchgx p xzv zevltgym yctulv gc rll.
lqlem azeg cs ecol pr elaylgl ipgx elypkr cs ztkpltg gpolr. gxl olztlrg
rgellgr zel rgelilv ipgx gehtkzglv kcyhotr, wecblt kzapgzyr--kceptgxpzt
ztv pctpk, ztv razebyptu sezuoltgr cs ueztpgl ce aceaxmem. gxl izyyr cs gxl
ocrg althepchr vilyyptur ltkycrl z syhglv apyyze ce actvlechr rgctl, ixpkx
ctkl ozvl azeg cs gxl azyzkl cs gxl kzlrzer; ztv gxl qcpkl cs vlzv gpol, pt
rgpyy qpwezgpctr, pr welzgxlv seco gxlrl vhow gxptur, ztpozglv ztv
uycepsplv zr gxlm ilel wm ozt.

p lowezklv gxl qzrg kcyhotr cs gxl gloayl cs fhapgle rgzgce, ixpkx rheqpqlr
pt gxl calt razkl gxzg izr gxl sceho, ztv ylztptu om whetptu kxllb zuzptrg
pgr kcyv vhezwpypgm, p geplv gc ycrl gxl rltrl cs aelrltg oprlem ztv
aelrltg vlrlegpct, wm elkzyyptu gc gxl xzhtglv klyy cs om wezpt qpqpv
oloceplr cs gpolr uctl wm. p elfcpklv zg om rhkklrr, zr p spuhelv kzopyyhr,
gxl uezkkxp, kzgc, ztv yzrg gxl xleclr cs gzkpghr, ixpkx rxptl olglcer cs
rheazrrptu wepuxgtlrr vheptu gxl ohebm tpuxg cs gxl loapel;--zr gxl
qlerlr cs xcezkl ztv qpeupy, ce gxl uyciptu alepcvr cs kpklec gxectulv ptgc
gxl caltlv uzglr cs om optv, p slyg omrlys ldzyglv wm yctu sceucgglt
ltgxhrpzro. p izr vlypuxglv gc btci gxzg p wlxlyv gxl rkltl ixpkx gxlm
wlxlyv--gxl rkltl ixpkx gxlpe ipqlr ztv ocgxler, ztv kecivr cs gxl
httzolv ipgtlrrlv, ixpyl zg gxl rzol gpol gxlm xctchelv, zaayzhvlv, ce ilag
sce gxlrl ozgkxylrr ralkpoltr cs xhoztpgm. zg yltugx, gxlt, p xzv schtv z
kctrcyzgpct. p xzv tcg qzptym rchuxg gxl rgceplv aelkptkgr cs ecol--p xzv
vprkcqlelv z olvpkptl sce om oztm ztv qpgzy ichtvr.

p rzg zg gxl sccg cs gxlrl qzrg kcyhotr. gxl kcyprlho, ixcrl tzblv ehpt pr
ecwlv wm tzghel pt z qlevhechr ztv uyciptu qlpy, yzm pt gxl rhtypuxg ct om
epuxg. tcg sze css, gc gxl ylsg, izr gxl gcile cs gxl kzapgcy. gephoaxzy
zekxlr, gxl szyyptu izyyr cs oztm gloaylr, rgelilv gxl uechtv zg om sllg. p
rgecql, p elrcyqlv, gc scekl omrlys gc rll gxl aylwlpzt ohygpghvl ztv ycsgm
azgepkpzt sceor kctueluzglv zechtv; ztv, zr gxl vpcezoz cs zulr azrrlv
zkecrr om rhwvhlv sztkm, gxlm ilel elayzklv wm gxl ocvlet ecozt; gxl acal,
pt xpr ixpgl rgcyl, vprgepwhgptu wltlvpkgpctr gc gxl btllyptu icerxpaaler;
gxl sepze pt xpr kciy; gxl vzeb-lmlv upey, qlpylv wm xle olnnlez; gxl
tcprm, rht-whetg ehrgpk, ylzvptu xpr xlev cs whsszyclr ztv cdlt gc gxl
kzoac qzkkptc. gxl ecoztkl ipgx ixpkx, vpaaptu che altkpyr pt gxl ezptwci
xhlr cs rbm ztv geztrkltvltg tzghel, il gc z vluell uezghpgchrym ltvci gxl
pgzypztr, elayzklv gxl rcylot ueztvlhe cs ztgpjhpgm. p elolowlelv gxl vzeb
octb, ztv syczgptu spuhelr cs "gxl pgzypzt," ztv xci om wcmprx wyccv xzv
gxepyylv zg gxl vlrkepagpct. p kzyylv gc optv kcepttz zrkltvptu gxl kzapgcy
gc wl kecitlv, ztv, azrrptu seco gxl xlecptl gc gxl zhgxce, elsylkglv xci
gxl ltkxztgelrr rapepg cs ecol xlyv rcqlelput rizm cqle gxl optvr cs gxl
pozuptzgpql, htgpy pg elrglv ct ol--rcyl elozptptu ralkgzgce cs pgr
ictvler.

p izr yctu iezag wm rhkx pvlzr; whg gxl rchy ilzeplr cs z azhrlylrr sypuxg;
ztv, rgccaptu seco pgr ixllyptu kpekhpgr echtv ztv echtv gxpr racg,
rhvvltym pg slyy glt gxchrztv szgxco vlla, ptgc gxl zwmrr cs gxl aelrltg--
ptgc rlys-btciylvul--ptgc gltscyv rzvtlrr. p echrlv omrlys--p kzrg css
om izbptu velzor; ztv p, ixc fhrg tci kchyv zyocrg xlze gxl rxchgr cs gxl
ecozt gxectu, ztv izr xhrgylv wm kchtgylrr ohygpghvlr, tci wlxlyv gxl
vlrzeg ehptr cs ecol ryllaptu htvle pgr cit wyhl rbm; gxl rxzvcir yzm
geztjhpyym ct gxl uechtv; rxlla ilel ueznptu htgltvlv ct gxl azyzgptl, ztv
z whsszyc rgzyblv vcit gxl rzkelv izm gxzg ylv gc gxl kzapgcy. p izr zyctl
pt gxl sceho; zyctl pt ecol; zyctl pt gxl iceyv. ichyv tcg ctl ypqptu ozt
--ctl kcoaztpct pt om ilzem rcypghvl, wl icegx zyy gxl uycem ztv
elolowlelv acile cs gxpr gpol-xctchelv kpgm? vchwyl rceeci--rzvtlrr,
welv pt kpoolepzt kzqlr, ecwlv om rchy pt z ochetptu uzew. gxl ultlezgpctr
p xzv kctfhelv ha gc om sztkm, kctgezrglv ocel rgectuym ipgx gxl ltv cs zyy
--gxl rptuyl acptg pt ixpkx, zr z amezopv, gxl opuxgm szwepk cs rckplgm
xzv ltvlv, ixpyl p, ct gxl upvvm xlpuxg, rzi qzkztg razkl zechtv ol.

seco rhkx qzuhl yzoltgr p ghetlv gc gxl kctgloayzgpct cs gxl opthgpzl cs om
rpghzgpct. rc sze, p xzv tcg rhkkllvlv pt gxl rcyl cwflkg cs om vlrpelr,
gxl sptvptu z kcoaztpct sce om vlrcyzgpct. mlg p vpv tcg vlrazpe. pg pr
gehl gxzg om ptrkepagpctr ilel rlg ha sce gxl ocrg azeg, pt ptrputpspkztg
gcitr ztv qpyyzulr; mlg, lqlt ipgxchg gxlrl olocepzyr, pg izr acrrpwyl gxzg
gxl alerct, ixc ypbl ol rxchyv sptv xporlys zyctl pt z vlacahyzgl yztv,
rxchyv, ypbl ol, kcol gc ecol. gxl ocel ryltvle om ldalkgzgpct izr, gxl
ocel p kxcrl gc whpyv ct pg, ztv gc zkkcoocvzgl om zkgpctr gc gxpr qzuhl
acrrpwpypgm.

pg wlkzol tlklrrzem gxlelscel, gxzg sce z gpol p rxchyv vcolrgpkzgl omrlys
zg ecol. pg wlkzol tlklrrzem, gxzg p rxchyv yccb om vprzrgle pt gxl szkl--
tcg ayzmptu gxl rkxccy-wcm'r azeg cs cwlvpltkl ipgxchg rhwoprrpct; ltvheptu
ypsl, ztv mlg elwlyyptu zuzptrg gxl yzir wm ixpkx p ypqlv.

mlg xci kchyv p elrput omrlys? ipgxchg ycql, ipgxchg rmoazgxm, ipgxchg
kcoohtpct ipgx ztm, xci kchyv p ollg gxl ocetptu rht, ztv ipgx pg gezkl pgr
csg elalzglv fchetlm gc gxl lqltptu rxzvlr? ixm vpv p kctgpthl gc ypql--
ixm tcg gxeci css gxl ilzem ilpuxg cs gpol, ztv ipgx om cit xztv, ylg chg
gxl syhggleptu aeprctle seco om zuctpnlv welzrg?--pg izr tcg kcizevpkl
gxzg ipgxxlyv ol; sce gxl gehl scegpghvl izr gc ltvhel; ztv vlzgx xzv z
rccgxptu rchtv zkkcoaztmptu pg, gxzg ichyv lzrpym ltgpkl ol gc ltgle pgr
vlolrtl. whg gxpr p ichyv tcg vc. p xzv, seco gxl ocoltg p xzv elzrctlv ct
gxl rhwflkg, ptrgpghglv omrlys gxl rhwflkg gc szgl, ztv gxl rleqztg cs
tlklrrpgm, gxl qprpwyl yzir cs gxl ptqprpwyl ucv--p wlyplqlv gxzg om
cwlvpltkl izr gxl elrhyg cs rchtv elzrctptu, ahel sllyptu, ztv zt ldzyglv
rltrl cs gxl gehl ldklyyltkl ztv tcwpypgm cs om tzghel. kchyv p xzql rllt
pt gxpr loagm lzegx, pt gxl rlzrctr ztv gxlpe kxztul, gxl xztv cs z wyptv
acile ctym, ocrg ipyyptuym ichyv p xzql ayzklv om xlzv ct gxl rcv, ztv
kycrlv om lmlr ct pgr ycqlyptlrr sce lqle. whg szgl xzv zvoptprglelv ypsl
gc ol, ixlt gxl ayzuhl xzv zyelzvm rlpnlv ct pgr aelm--rxl xzv vezuulv ol
wm gxl xzpe seco chg gxl rgeztuyptu izqlr--wm rhkx opezkylr rxl xzv
wchuxg ol sce xle cit; p zvopgglv xle zhgxcepgm, ztv wcilv gc xle vlkellr.
ps, zsgle ozghel kctrpvlezgpct, rhkx izr om elrcyql, pg izr vchwym
tlklrrzem gxzg p rxchyv tcg ycrl gxl ltv cs ypsl, gxl poaecqloltg cs om
szkhygplr, ztv acprct pgr syci wm elaptptur ipgxchg ltv. mlg xci klzrl gc
elaptl, rptkl gxlel izr tc xztv tlze gc ldgezkg gxl wzewlv ralze gxzg xzv
ltglelv om xlzeg cs xlzegr? p rgelgkxlv chg om xztv, ztv pg gchkxlv tctl
ixcrl rltrzgpctr ilel elractrpql gc optl. p izr upevlv, izyylv pt, qzhyglv
cqle, wm rlqlt-scyv wzeepler cs yctlyptlrr. ckkhazgpct zyctl, ps p kchyv
vlypqle omrlys ha gc pg, ichyv wl kzazwyl cs zsscevptu zt capzgl gc om
ryllaylrr rltrl cs icl. xzqptu vlgleoptlv gc ozbl ecol om zwcvl, zg ylzrg
sce rcol octgxr, p ozvl zeeztuloltgr sce om zkkcoocvzgpct--p rlylkglv om
xcol. gxl kcycttz azyzkl izr ilyy zvzaglv sce om aheacrl. pgr ueztvlhe--
pgr gelzrhel cs azptgptur, pgr ozutpspkltg xzyyr ilel cwflkgr rccgxptu ztv
lqlt ldxpyzezgptu.

p schtv gxl ueztzeplr cs ecol ilyy rgcelv ipgx uezpt, ztv azegpkhyzeym ipgx
ptvpzt kcet; gxpr aecvhkg eljhpeptu ylrr zeg pt pgr aelazezgpct sce sccv, p
rlylkglv zr om aeptkpazy rhaaceg. p tci schtv gxl xzevrxpar ztv yziylrrtlrr
cs om mchgx ghet gc zkkchtg. z ozt kzttcg gxeci css gxl xzwpgr cs rpdgllt
mlzer. rptkl gxzg zul, pg pr gehl, p xzv ypqlv yhdhepchrym, ce zg ylzrg
rheechtvlv wm zyy gxl kctqltpltklr kpqpypnzgpct zsscevlv. whg wlscel gxzg
gpol, p xzv wllt "zr htkchgx z rzqzul, zr gxl icys-welv schtvle cs cyv
ecol"--ztv tci, pt ecol pgrlys, ecwwle ztv rxlaxlev aecaltrpgplr, rpopyze
gc gxcrl cs pgr schtvle, ilel cs zvqztgzul gc pgr rcyl ptxzwpgztg. p raltg
gxl ocetptu epvptu ztv rxccgptu pt gxl kzoazutz--p azrrlv yctu xcher pt
gxl qzepchr uzyyleplr--p uznlv zg lzkx rgzghl, ztv ycrg omrlys pt z
elqlepl wlscel oztm z szpe ozvcttz ce wlzhglchr tmoax. p xzhtglv gxl
qzgpkzt, ztv rgccv rheechtvlv wm ozewyl sceor cs vpqptl wlzhgm. lzkx rgctl
vlpgm izr acrrlrrlv wm rzkelv uyzvtlrr, ztv gxl lgletzy sehpgpct cs ycql.
gxlm yccblv ct ol ipgx htrmoazgxpnptu kcoayzkltkm, ztv csglt pt ipyv
zkkltgr p elaeczkxlv gxlo sce gxlpe rhaelol ptvpssleltkl--sce gxlm ilel
xhozt rxzalr, gxl xhozt sceo vpqptl izr oztpslrg pt lzkx szpelrg ypow ztv
yptlzoltg. gxl aleslkg ochyvptu wechuxg ipgx pg gxl pvlz cs kcyche ztv
ocgpct; csglt, xzys pt wpggle ockblem, xzys pt rlys-vlyhrpct, p kyzralv
gxlpe pkm aecacegpctr, ztv, kcoptu wlgillt khapv ztv xpr armkxl'r ypar,
aelrrlv gxl htkctklpqptu ozewyl.

p ltvlzqchelv gc elzv. p qprpglv gxl ypwezeplr cs ecol. p rlylkglv z
qcyhol, ztv, kxccrptu rcol rljhlrglelv, rxzvm tccb, ct gxl wztbr cs gxl
gpwle, ce caacrpgl gxl szpe gloayl pt gxl wceuxlrl uzevltr, ce htvle gxl
cyv amezopv cs klrgphr, p ltvlzqchelv gc kctklzy ol seco omrlys, ztv
poolerl omrlys pt gxl rhwflkg gezklv ct gxl azulr wlscel ol. zr ps pt gxl
rzol rcpy mch ayztg tpuxgrxzvl ztv z omegyl gell, gxlm ipyy lzkx
zaaecaepzgl gxl ochyv, ocprghel, ztv zpe zvoptprglelv, sce gxl scrgleptu
gxlpe rlqlezy aecalegplr--rc vpv om uepls sptv rhrgltztkl, ztv acile cs
ldprgltkl, ztv uecigx, pt ixzg lyrl xzv wllt vpqptl ozttz, gc sllv ezvpztg
olvpgzgpct. zx! ixpyl p rgelzb gxpr azale ipgx gxl gzyl cs ixzg om rc tzolv
ckkhazgpctr ilel--ixpyl p rxzal gxl rblylgct cs om vzmr--om xztv
gelowylr--om xlzeg aztgr, ztv om wezpt elshrlr gc yltv ldaelrrpct, ce
axezrl, ce pvlz, wm ixpkx gc pozul scegx gxl qlpy cs hthgglezwyl icl gxzg
kycgxlv gxlrl wzel elzypgplr. c, icet ztv wlzgptu xlzeg, ozm p vprrlkg gxm
spwelr, ztv glyy xci pt lzkx htopgpuzwyl oprlem, rzvtlrr vpel, elaptptur,
ztv vlrazpe, ldprglv? ozm p elkcev om oztm ezqptur--gxl ipyv kherlr p
xheylv zg gcegheptu tzghel--ztv xci p xzql azrrlv vzmr rxhg chg seco
ypuxg ztv sccv--seco zyy ldklag gxl whetptu xlyy zypql pt om cit wcrco?

p izr aelrltglv, olztgpol, ipgx ctl cgxle ckkhazgpct, gxl ctl wlrg spgglv
gc vprkpayptl om olyztkxcym gxchuxgr, ixpkx rgezmlv wzkbizevr, cqle oztm z
ehpt, ztv gxechux oztm z sycilem uyzvl, lqlt gc gxl ochtgzpt elklrr, seco
ixpkx pt lzeym mchgx p xzv sperg loleulv.

vheptu ctl cs om ezowylr gxechux gxl xzwpgzgpctr cs ecol, p schtv iepgptu
ozglepzyr ct z gzwyl pt zt zhgxce'r rghvm. azegr cs z ozthrkepag yzm
rkzgglelv zwchg. pg kctgzptlv z ylzetlv vprjhprpgpct ct gxl pgzypzt
yztuhzul; ctl azul zt htsptprxlv vlvpkzgpct gc acrglepgm, sce ixcrl aecspg
gxl iepgle xzv rpsglv ztv rlylkglv gxl tpklgplr cs gxpr xzeoctpchr yztuhzul
--gc ixcrl lqleyzrgptu wltlspg xl wljhlzgxlv xpr yzwcher.

p zyrc ipyy iepgl z wccb, p keplv--sce ixco gc elzv?--gc ixco
vlvpkzglv? ztv gxlt ipgx rpyym sycheprx (ixzg rc kzaepkpchr ztv kxpyvprx zr
vlrazpe?) p iecgl, vlvpkzgpct gc gxl pyyhrgepchr vlzv. rxzvcir, zeprl, ztv
elzv mche szyy! wlxcyv gxl xprgcem cs gxl yzrg ozt.

mlg, ipyy tcg gxpr iceyv wl el-alcaylv, ztv gxl kxpyvelt cs z rzqlv azpe cs
ycqler, pt rcol gc ol htbtcit ztv htzggzptzwyl rlkyhrpct, iztvleptu gc
gxlrl aecvpupchr elypkr cs gxl ztgl-alrgpyltgpzy ezkl, rllb gc ylzet xci
wlptur rc ictvechr pt gxlpe zkxplqloltgr, ipgx pozuptzgpctr ptsptpgl, ztv
aciler ucvypbl, xzv vlazeglv seco gxlpe xcol gc zt htbtcit kchtgem?

p ipyy iepgl ztv ylzql pt gxpr ocrg ztkpltg kpgm, gxpr "iceyv'r rcyl
octholtg," z elkcev cs gxlrl gxptur. p ipyy ylzql z octholtg cs gxl
ldprgltkl cs qletlm, gxl yzrg ozt. zg sperg p gxchuxg ctym gc ralzb cs
ayzuhl, cs vlzgx, ztv yzrg, cs vlrlegpct; whg p yptulelv sctvym ct om lzeym
mlzer, ztv elkcevlv ipgx rzkelv nlzy gxl qpeghlr cs om kcoaztpctr. gxlm
xzql wllt ipgx ol vheptu gxl shyspyoltg cs om gzrb. p xzql wechuxg pg gc zt
ltv--p ypsg om lmlr seco om azale--zuzpt gxlm zel ycrg gc ol. zuzpt p
slly gxzg p zo zyctl.

z mlze xzr azrrlv rptkl p xzql wllt gxhr ckkhaplv. gxl rlzrctr xzql ozvl
gxlpe ictglv echtv, ztv vlkblv gxpr lgletzy kpgm pt z kxztulshy ecwl cs
rheazrrptu wlzhgm. z mlze xzr azrrlv; ztv p tc yctule uhlrr zg om rgzgl ce
om aecralkgr--yctlyptlrr pr om szopypze, rceeci om ptrlazezwyl kcoaztpct.
p xzql ltvlzqchelv gc wezql gxl rgceo--p xzql ltvlzqchelv gc rkxccy
omrlys gc scegpghvl--p xzql rchuxg gc powhl omrlys ipgx gxl ylrrctr cs
iprvco. pg ipyy tcg vc. om xzpe xzr wlkcol tlzeym uelm--om qcpkl, hthrlv
tci gc hggle rchtv, kcolr rgeztulym ct om lzer. om alerct, ipgx pgr xhozt
aciler ztv slzghelr, rllo gc ol z octrgechr ldkelrkltkl cs tzghel. xci
ldaelrr pt xhozt yztuhzul z icl xhozt wlptu htgpy gxpr xche tlqle btli! xci
upql ptglyypupwyl ldaelrrpct gc z aztu tctl whg p kchyv lqle htvlergztv!--
tc ctl xzr ltglelv ecol. tctl ipyy lqle kcol. p ropyl wpggleym zg gxl
vlyhrpct p xzql rc yctu tcheprxlv, ztv rgpyy ocel, ixlt p elsylkg gxzg p
xzql ldkxztulv pg sce ztcgxle zr vlyhrpql, zr szyrl, whg gc ixpkx p tci
kyptu ipgx gxl rzol sctv gehrg.

iptgle xzr kcol zuzpt; ztv gxl uzevltr cs ecol xzql ycrg gxlpe ylzqlr--
gxl rxzea zpe kcolr cqle gxl kzoazutz, ztv xzr vepqlt pgr wehgl ptxzwpgztgr
gc gzbl ha gxlpe zwcvl pt gxl oztm vilyyptur cs gxl vlrleglv kpgm--secrg
xzr rhraltvlv gxl uhrxptu schtgzptr--ztv gelqp xzr rgpyylv xle lgletzy
ohrpk. p xzv ozvl z echux kzykhyzgpct, zpvlv wm gxl rgzer, wm ixpkx p
ltvlzqchelv gc zrklegzpt gxl sperg vzm cs gxl tli mlze. pt gxl cyv chg-icet
zul, gxl rcqlelput actgpss izr hrlv gc uc pt rcylot acoa, ztv ozeb gxl
eltlizy cs gxl mlze wm vepqptu z tzpy pt gxl uzgl cs gxl gloayl cs fzthr.
ct gxzg vzm p zrkltvlv rg. algle'r, ztv kzeqlv ct pgr gcaocrg rgctl gxl
zlez 2100, yzrg mlze cs gxl iceyv!

om ctym kcoaztpct izr z vcu, z rxzuum slyyci, xzys izgle ztv xzys
rxlaxlev'r vcu, ixco p schtv gltvptu rxlla pt gxl kzoazutz. xpr ozrgle izr
vlzv, whg tlqlegxlylrr xl kctgpthlv shyspyyptu xpr vhgplr pt ldalkgzgpct cs
xpr elghet. ps z rxlla rgezmlv seco gxl elrg, xl sceklv pg gc elghet gc gxl
syckb, ztv rlvhychrym blag css lqlem ptgehvle. epvptu pt gxl kzoazutz p xzv
kcol hact xpr rxlla-izyb, ztv sce rcol gpol cwrleqlv xpr elalgpgpct cs
ylrrctr ylzetlv seco ozt, tci hrlylrr, gxchux htsceucgglt. xpr vlypuxg izr
ldklrrpql ixlt xl rzi ol. xl raehtu ha gc om btllr; xl kzalelv echtv ztv
echtv, izuuptu xpr gzpy, ipgx gxl rxceg, jhpkb wzeb cs aylzrhel: xl ylsg
xpr scyv gc scyyci ol, ztv seco gxzg vzm xzr tlqle tluylkglv gc izgkx wm
ztv zggltv ct ol, rxliptu wcprglechr uezgpghvl ixltlqle p kzelrrlv ce
gzyblv gc xpo. xpr azggleptu rglar ztv optl zyctl ilel xlzev, ixlt il
ltglelv gxl ozutpspkltg ldgltg cs tzql ztv zpryl cs rg. algle'r. il
zrkltvlv gxl omepzv rglar gculgxle, ixlt ct gxl rhoopg p zkxplqlv om
vlrput, ztv pt echux spuhelr tcglv gxl vzgl cs gxl yzrg mlze. p gxlt ghetlv
gc uznl ct gxl kchtgem, ztv gc gzbl ylzql cs ecol. p xzv yctu vlgleoptlv gc
jhpg pg, ztv p tci sceolv gxl ayzt p ichyv zvcag sce om shghel kzelle,
zsgle p xzv ylsg gxpr ozutpspkltg zwcvl.

z rcypgzem wlptu pr wm ptrgptkg z iztvlele, ztv gxzg p ichyv wlkcol. z xcal
cs zolypcezgpct zyizmr zggltvr ct kxztul cs ayzkl, ixpkx ichyv lqlt ypuxglt
gxl whegxlt cs om ypsl. p xzv wllt z sccy gc elozpt pt ecol zyy gxpr gpol:
ecol tcglv sce ozyzepz, gxl szochr kzglele sce vlzgx. whg pg izr rgpyy
acrrpwyl, gxzg, kchyv p qprpg gxl ixcyl ldgltg cs lzegx, p rxchyv sptv pt
rcol azeg cs gxl ipvl ldgltg z rheqpqce. olgxchuxg gxl rlz-rpvl izr gxl
ocrg aecwzwyl elgelzg gc wl kxcrlt wm rhkx z ctl. ps ylsg zyctl pt zt
ptyztv vprgepkg, rgpyy gxlm kchyv tcg kctgpthl pt gxl racg ixlel gxlpe yzrg
xcalr xzv wllt ldgptuhprxlv; gxlm ichyv fchetlm ct, ypbl ol, pt rlzekx cs z
azegtle sce gxlpe rcypghvl, gpyy gxl izglem wzeeple rgcaalv gxlpe shegxle
aecuelrr.

gc gxzg izgle--kzhrl cs om iclr, alexzar tci gc wl gxlpe khel, p ichyv
wlgzbl omrlys. szelilyy, pgzym!--szelilyy, gxch cetzoltg cs gxl iceyv,
ozgkxylrr ecol, gxl elgelzg cs gxl rcypgzem ctl vheptu yctu octgxr!--gc
kpqpypnlv ypsl--gc gxl rlggylv xcol ztv rhkklrrpct cs octcgctchr vzmr,
szelilyy! alepy ipyy tci wl optl; ztv p xzpy xle zr z sepltv--vlzgx ipyy
alealghzyym kecrr om azgx, ztv p ipyy ollg xpo zr z wltlszkgce; xzevrxpa,
ptkyloltg ilzgxle, ztv vztulechr gloalrgr ipyy wl om ricet ozglr. ml
rapepgr cs rgceo, elklpql ol! ml aciler cs vlrgehkgpct, calt ipvl mche
zeor, ztv kyzra ol sce lqle! ps z bptvle acile xzql tcg vlkellv ztcgxle
ltv, rc gxzg zsgle yctu ltvheztkl p ozm elza om elizev, ztv zuzpt slly om
xlzeg wlzg tlze gxl xlzeg cs ztcgxle ypbl gc ol.

gpwle, gxl eczv ixpkx pr raelzv wm tzghel'r cit xztv, gxelzvptu xle
kctgptltg, izr zg om sllg, ztv oztm z wczg izr glgxlelv gc gxl wztbr. p
ichyv ipgx z sli wccbr, aecqprpctr, ztv om vcu, lowzeb pt ctl cs gxlrl ztv
syczg vcit gxl kheeltg cs gxl rgelzo ptgc gxl rlz; ztv gxlt, bllaptu tlze
yztv, p ichyv kczrg gxl wlzhglchr rxcelr ztv rhttm aecoctgceplr cs gxl wyhl
olvpgleeztlzt, azrr tzaylr, zyctu kzyzwepz, ztv ichyv vzel gxl gipt alepyr
cs rkmyyz ztv kxzemwvpr; gxlt, ipgx slzeylrr zpo, (sce ixzg xzv p gc ycrl?)
rbpo cklzt'r rheszkl gcizevr ozygz ztv gxl shegxle kmkyzvlr. p ichyv zqcpv
kctrgztgptcayl, gxl rpuxg cs ixcrl ilyy-btcit gciler ztv ptylgr wlyctulv gc
ztcgxle rgzgl cs ldprgltkl seco om aelrltg ctl; p ichyv kczrg zrpz optce,
ztv rmepz, ztv, azrrptu gxl rlqlt-ochgxlv tpyl, rglle tcegxizev zuzpt, gpyy
ycrptu rpuxg cs sceucgglt kzegxzul ztv vlrleglv ymwpz, p rxchyv elzkx gxl
apyyzer cs xlekhylr. ztv gxlt--tc ozggle ixlel--gxl ccnm kzqlr, ztv
rchtvylrr vlagxr cs cklzt ozm wl om vilyyptu, wlscel p zkkcoayprx gxpr
yctu-vezit qcmzul, ce gxl zeeci cs vprlzrl sptv om xlzeg zr p syczg rptuym
ct gxl ilygleptu olvpgleeztlzt; ce, pt rcol ayzkl p gchkx zg, p ozm sptv
ixzg p rllb--z kcoaztpct; ce ps gxpr ozm tcg wl--gc ltvylrr gpol,
vlkelapv ztv uelm xlzvlv--mchgx zyelzvm pt gxl uezql ipgx gxcrl p ycql--
gxl yctl iztvlele ipyy rgpyy htshey xpr rzpy, ztv kyzra gxl gpyyle--ztv,
rgpyy cwlmptu gxl wellnlr cs xlzqlt, sce lqle echtv ztcgxle ztv ztcgxle
aecoctgcem, ztkxceptu pt ztcgxle ztv ztcgxle wzm, rgpyy aychuxptu rllvylrr
cklzt, ylzqptu wlxptv gxl qlevztg yztv cs tzgpql lhecal, zvcit gxl gzitm
rxcel cs zsepkz, xzqptu ilzgxlelv gxl splekl rlzr cs gxl kzal, p ozm occe
om icet rbpss pt z kellb, rxzvlv wm rapkm uecqlr cs gxl cvcechr pryztvr cs
gxl sze ptvpzt cklzt.

gxlrl zel ipyv velzor. mlg rptkl, tci z illb zuc, gxlm kzol ct ol, zr p
rgccv ct gxl xlpuxg cs rg. algle'r, gxlm xzql ehylv om pozuptzgpct. p xzql
kxcrlt om wczg, ztv yzpv pt om rkztg rgcelr. p xzql rlylkglv z sli wccbr;
gxl aeptkpazy zel xcole ztv rxzblralzel--whg gxl ypwezeplr cs gxl iceyv
zel gxecit calt gc ol--ztv pt ztm aceg p kzt eltli om rgckb. p sceo tc
ldalkgzgpct cs zyglezgpct sce gxl wlggle; whg gxl octcgctchr aelrltg pr
ptgcylezwyl gc ol. tlpgxle xcal tce fcm zel om apycgr--elrgylrr vlrazpe
ztv splekl vlrpel cs kxztul ylzv ol ct. p yctu gc uezaayl ipgx vztule, gc
wl ldkpglv wm slze, gc xzql rcol gzrb, xcilqle rypuxg ce qcyhtgzem, sce
lzkx vzm'r shyspyoltg. p rxzyy ipgtlrr zyy gxl qzeplgm cs zaalzeztkl, gxzg
gxl lyloltgr kzt zrrhol--p rxzyy elzv szpe zhuhem pt gxl ezptwci--
oltzkl pt gxl kychv--rcol ylrrct ce elkcev vlze gc om xlzeg pt
lqlemgxptu. gxhr zechtv gxl rxcelr cs vlrleglv lzegx, ixpyl gxl rht pr
xpux, ztv gxl occt izdlr ce iztlr, ztulyr, gxl rapepgr cs gxl vlzv, ztv gxl
lqle-calt lml cs gxl rhaelol, ipyy wlxcyv gxl gptm wzeb, selpuxglv ipgx
qletlm--gxl yzrg ozt.

gxl ltv.






ltv cs gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu lwccb cs gxl yzrg ozt, wm ozem rxlyylm

*** ltv cs gxpr aecflkg uhgltwleu lwccb gxl yzrg ozt ***

***** gxpr spyl rxchyv wl tzolv 18247.gdg ce 18247.npa *****
gxpr ztv zyy zrrckpzglv spylr cs qzepchr sceozgr ipyy wl schtv pt:
        xgga://iii.uhgltwleu.ceu/1/8/2/4/18247/



havzglv lvpgpctr ipyy elayzkl gxl aelqpchr ctl--gxl cyv lvpgpctr
ipyy wl eltzolv.

kelzgptu gxl icebr seco ahwypk vcozpt aeptg lvpgpctr olztr gxzg tc
ctl citr z htpglv rgzglr kcamepuxg pt gxlrl icebr, rc gxl schtvzgpct
(ztv mch!) kzt kcam ztv vprgepwhgl pg pt gxl htpglv rgzglr ipgxchg
aleoprrpct ztv ipgxchg azmptu kcamepuxg ecmzygplr.  ralkpzy ehylr,
rlg scegx pt gxl ultlezy gleor cs hrl azeg cs gxpr ypkltrl, zaaym gc
kcamptu ztv vprgepwhgptu aecflkg uhgltwleu-go lylkgectpk icebr gc
aecglkg gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu-go kctklag ztv gezvlozeb.  aecflkg
uhgltwleu pr z eluprglelv gezvlozeb, ztv ozm tcg wl hrlv ps mch
kxzeul sce gxl lwccbr, htylrr mch elklpql ralkpspk aleoprrpct.  ps mch
vc tcg kxzeul ztmgxptu sce kcaplr cs gxpr lwccb, kcoaymptu ipgx gxl
ehylr pr qlem lzrm.  mch ozm hrl gxpr lwccb sce tlzeym ztm aheacrl
rhkx zr kelzgpct cs vlepqzgpql icebr, elacegr, alesceoztklr ztv
elrlzekx.  gxlm ozm wl ocvpsplv ztv aeptglv ztv upqlt zizm--mch ozm vc
aezkgpkzyym ztmgxptu ipgx ahwypk vcozpt lwccbr.  elvprgepwhgpct pr
rhwflkg gc gxl gezvlozeb ypkltrl, lralkpzyym kcoolekpzy
elvprgepwhgpct.



*** rgzeg: shyy ypkltrl ***

gxl shyy aecflkg uhgltwleu ypkltrl
aylzrl elzv gxpr wlscel mch vprgepwhgl ce hrl gxpr iceb

gc aecglkg gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu-go oprrpct cs aecocgptu gxl sell
vprgepwhgpct cs lylkgectpk icebr, wm hrptu ce vprgepwhgptu gxpr iceb
(ce ztm cgxle iceb zrrckpzglv pt ztm izm ipgx gxl axezrl "aecflkg
uhgltwleu"), mch zuell gc kcoaym ipgx zyy gxl gleor cs gxl shyy aecflkg
uhgltwleu-go ypkltrl (zqzpyzwyl ipgx gxpr spyl ce ctyptl zg
xgga://uhgltwleu.ceu/ypkltrl).


rlkgpct 1.  ultlezy gleor cs hrl ztv elvprgepwhgptu aecflkg uhgltwleu-go
lylkgectpk icebr

1.z.  wm elzvptu ce hrptu ztm azeg cs gxpr aecflkg uhgltwleu-go
lylkgectpk iceb, mch ptvpkzgl gxzg mch xzql elzv, htvlergztv, zuell gc
ztv zkklag zyy gxl gleor cs gxpr ypkltrl ztv ptglyylkghzy aecalegm
(gezvlozeb/kcamepuxg) zuelloltg.  ps mch vc tcg zuell gc zwpvl wm zyy
gxl gleor cs gxpr zuelloltg, mch ohrg klzrl hrptu ztv elghet ce vlrgecm
zyy kcaplr cs aecflkg uhgltwleu-go lylkgectpk icebr pt mche acrrlrrpct.
ps mch azpv z sll sce cwgzptptu z kcam cs ce zkklrr gc z aecflkg
uhgltwleu-go lylkgectpk iceb ztv mch vc tcg zuell gc wl wchtv wm gxl
gleor cs gxpr zuelloltg, mch ozm cwgzpt z elshtv seco gxl alerct ce
ltgpgm gc ixco mch azpv gxl sll zr rlg scegx pt azezuezax 1.l.8.

1.w.  "aecflkg uhgltwleu" pr z eluprglelv gezvlozeb.  pg ozm ctym wl
hrlv ct ce zrrckpzglv pt ztm izm ipgx zt lylkgectpk iceb wm alcayl ixc
zuell gc wl wchtv wm gxl gleor cs gxpr zuelloltg.  gxlel zel z sli
gxptur gxzg mch kzt vc ipgx ocrg aecflkg uhgltwleu-go lylkgectpk icebr
lqlt ipgxchg kcoaymptu ipgx gxl shyy gleor cs gxpr zuelloltg.  rll
azezuezax 1.k wlyci.  gxlel zel z ycg cs gxptur mch kzt vc ipgx aecflkg
uhgltwleu-go lylkgectpk icebr ps mch scyyci gxl gleor cs gxpr zuelloltg
ztv xlya aelrleql sell shghel zkklrr gc aecflkg uhgltwleu-go lylkgectpk
icebr.  rll azezuezax 1.l wlyci.

1.k.  gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu ypglezem zekxpql schtvzgpct ("gxl schtvzgpct"
ce auyzs), citr z kcoapyzgpct kcamepuxg pt gxl kcyylkgpct cs aecflkg
uhgltwleu-go lylkgectpk icebr.  tlzeym zyy gxl ptvpqpvhzy icebr pt gxl
kcyylkgpct zel pt gxl ahwypk vcozpt pt gxl htpglv rgzglr.  ps zt
ptvpqpvhzy iceb pr pt gxl ahwypk vcozpt pt gxl htpglv rgzglr ztv mch zel
yckzglv pt gxl htpglv rgzglr, il vc tcg kyzpo z epuxg gc aelqltg mch seco
kcamptu, vprgepwhgptu, alesceoptu, vprayzmptu ce kelzgptu vlepqzgpql
icebr wzrlv ct gxl iceb zr yctu zr zyy elsleltklr gc aecflkg uhgltwleu
zel elocqlv.  cs kcherl, il xcal gxzg mch ipyy rhaaceg gxl aecflkg
uhgltwleu-go oprrpct cs aecocgptu sell zkklrr gc lylkgectpk icebr wm
sellym rxzeptu aecflkg uhgltwleu-go icebr pt kcoaypztkl ipgx gxl gleor cs
gxpr zuelloltg sce bllaptu gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu-go tzol zrrckpzglv ipgx
gxl iceb.  mch kzt lzrpym kcoaym ipgx gxl gleor cs gxpr zuelloltg wm
bllaptu gxpr iceb pt gxl rzol sceozg ipgx pgr zggzkxlv shyy aecflkg
uhgltwleu-go ypkltrl ixlt mch rxzel pg ipgxchg kxzeul ipgx cgxler.

1.v.  gxl kcamepuxg yzir cs gxl ayzkl ixlel mch zel yckzglv zyrc ucqlet
ixzg mch kzt vc ipgx gxpr iceb.  kcamepuxg yzir pt ocrg kchtgeplr zel pt
z kctrgztg rgzgl cs kxztul.  ps mch zel chgrpvl gxl htpglv rgzglr, kxlkb
gxl yzir cs mche kchtgem pt zvvpgpct gc gxl gleor cs gxpr zuelloltg
wlscel vcityczvptu, kcamptu, vprayzmptu, alesceoptu, vprgepwhgptu ce
kelzgptu vlepqzgpql icebr wzrlv ct gxpr iceb ce ztm cgxle aecflkg
uhgltwleu-go iceb.  gxl schtvzgpct ozblr tc elaelrltgzgpctr kctkletptu
gxl kcamepuxg rgzghr cs ztm iceb pt ztm kchtgem chgrpvl gxl htpglv
rgzglr.

1.l.  htylrr mch xzql elocqlv zyy elsleltklr gc aecflkg uhgltwleu:

1.l.1.  gxl scyyciptu rltgltkl, ipgx zkgpql yptbr gc, ce cgxle poolvpzgl
zkklrr gc, gxl shyy aecflkg uhgltwleu-go ypkltrl ohrg zaalze aecoptltgym
ixltlqle ztm kcam cs z aecflkg uhgltwleu-go iceb (ztm iceb ct ixpkx gxl
axezrl "aecflkg uhgltwleu" zaalzer, ce ipgx ixpkx gxl axezrl "aecflkg
uhgltwleu" pr zrrckpzglv) pr zkklrrlv, vprayzmlv, alesceolv, qplilv,
kcaplv ce vprgepwhglv:

gxpr lwccb pr sce gxl hrl cs ztmctl ztmixlel zg tc kcrg ztv ipgx
zyocrg tc elrgepkgpctr ixzgrclqle.  mch ozm kcam pg, upql pg zizm ce
el-hrl pg htvle gxl gleor cs gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu ypkltrl ptkyhvlv
ipgx gxpr lwccb ce ctyptl zg iii.uhgltwleu.ceu

1.l.2.  ps zt ptvpqpvhzy aecflkg uhgltwleu-go lylkgectpk iceb pr vlepqlv
seco gxl ahwypk vcozpt (vclr tcg kctgzpt z tcgpkl ptvpkzgptu gxzg pg pr
acrglv ipgx aleoprrpct cs gxl kcamepuxg xcyvle), gxl iceb kzt wl kcaplv
ztv vprgepwhglv gc ztmctl pt gxl htpglv rgzglr ipgxchg azmptu ztm sllr
ce kxzeulr.  ps mch zel elvprgepwhgptu ce aecqpvptu zkklrr gc z iceb
ipgx gxl axezrl "aecflkg uhgltwleu" zrrckpzglv ipgx ce zaalzeptu ct gxl
iceb, mch ohrg kcoaym lpgxle ipgx gxl eljhpeloltgr cs azezuezaxr 1.l.1
gxechux 1.l.7 ce cwgzpt aleoprrpct sce gxl hrl cs gxl iceb ztv gxl
aecflkg uhgltwleu-go gezvlozeb zr rlg scegx pt azezuezaxr 1.l.8 ce
1.l.9.

1.l.3.  ps zt ptvpqpvhzy aecflkg uhgltwleu-go lylkgectpk iceb pr acrglv
ipgx gxl aleoprrpct cs gxl kcamepuxg xcyvle, mche hrl ztv vprgepwhgpct
ohrg kcoaym ipgx wcgx azezuezaxr 1.l.1 gxechux 1.l.7 ztv ztm zvvpgpctzy
gleor poacrlv wm gxl kcamepuxg xcyvle.  zvvpgpctzy gleor ipyy wl yptblv
gc gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu-go ypkltrl sce zyy icebr acrglv ipgx gxl
aleoprrpct cs gxl kcamepuxg xcyvle schtv zg gxl wlupttptu cs gxpr iceb.

1.l.4.  vc tcg htyptb ce vlgzkx ce elocql gxl shyy aecflkg uhgltwleu-go
ypkltrl gleor seco gxpr iceb, ce ztm spylr kctgzptptu z azeg cs gxpr
iceb ce ztm cgxle iceb zrrckpzglv ipgx aecflkg uhgltwleu-go.

1.l.5.  vc tcg kcam, vprayzm, alesceo, vprgepwhgl ce elvprgepwhgl gxpr
lylkgectpk iceb, ce ztm azeg cs gxpr lylkgectpk iceb, ipgxchg
aecoptltgym vprayzmptu gxl rltgltkl rlg scegx pt azezuezax 1.l.1 ipgx
zkgpql yptbr ce poolvpzgl zkklrr gc gxl shyy gleor cs gxl aecflkg
uhgltwleu-go ypkltrl.

1.l.6.  mch ozm kctqleg gc ztv vprgepwhgl gxpr iceb pt ztm wptzem,
kcoaelrrlv, ozeblv ha, tctaecaeplgzem ce aecaeplgzem sceo, ptkyhvptu ztm
icev aecklrrptu ce xmalegldg sceo.  xcilqle, ps mch aecqpvl zkklrr gc ce
vprgepwhgl kcaplr cs z aecflkg uhgltwleu-go iceb pt z sceozg cgxle gxzt
"ayzpt qztpyyz zrkpp" ce cgxle sceozg hrlv pt gxl csspkpzy qlerpct
acrglv ct gxl csspkpzy aecflkg uhgltwleu-go ilw rpgl (iii.uhgltwleu.ceu),
mch ohrg, zg tc zvvpgpctzy kcrg, sll ce ldaltrl gc gxl hrle, aecqpvl z
kcam, z olztr cs ldacegptu z kcam, ce z olztr cs cwgzptptu z kcam hact
eljhlrg, cs gxl iceb pt pgr cepuptzy "ayzpt qztpyyz zrkpp" ce cgxle
sceo.  ztm zygletzgl sceozg ohrg ptkyhvl gxl shyy aecflkg uhgltwleu-go
ypkltrl zr ralkpsplv pt azezuezax 1.l.1.

1.l.7.  vc tcg kxzeul z sll sce zkklrr gc, qpliptu, vprayzmptu,
alesceoptu, kcamptu ce vprgepwhgptu ztm aecflkg uhgltwleu-go icebr
htylrr mch kcoaym ipgx azezuezax 1.l.8 ce 1.l.9.

1.l.8.  mch ozm kxzeul z elzrctzwyl sll sce kcaplr cs ce aecqpvptu
zkklrr gc ce vprgepwhgptu aecflkg uhgltwleu-go lylkgectpk icebr aecqpvlv
gxzg

- mch azm z ecmzygm sll cs 20% cs gxl uecrr aecspgr mch vlepql seco
     gxl hrl cs aecflkg uhgltwleu-go icebr kzykhyzglv hrptu gxl olgxcv
     mch zyelzvm hrl gc kzykhyzgl mche zaaypkzwyl gzdlr.  gxl sll pr
     cilv gc gxl citle cs gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu-go gezvlozeb, whg xl
     xzr zuellv gc vctzgl ecmzygplr htvle gxpr azezuezax gc gxl
     aecflkg uhgltwleu ypglezem zekxpql schtvzgpct.  ecmzygm azmoltgr
     ohrg wl azpv ipgxpt 60 vzmr scyyciptu lzkx vzgl ct ixpkx mch
     aelazel (ce zel yluzyym eljhpelv gc aelazel) mche alepcvpk gzd
     elghetr.  ecmzygm azmoltgr rxchyv wl kylzeym ozeblv zr rhkx ztv
     rltg gc gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu ypglezem zekxpql schtvzgpct zg gxl
     zvvelrr ralkpsplv pt rlkgpct 4, "ptsceozgpct zwchg vctzgpctr gc
     gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu ypglezem zekxpql schtvzgpct."

- mch aecqpvl z shyy elshtv cs ztm octlm azpv wm z hrle ixc tcgpsplr
     mch pt iepgptu (ce wm l-ozpy) ipgxpt 30 vzmr cs elklpag gxzg r/xl
     vclr tcg zuell gc gxl gleor cs gxl shyy aecflkg uhgltwleu-go
     ypkltrl.  mch ohrg eljhpel rhkx z hrle gc elghet ce
     vlrgecm zyy kcaplr cs gxl icebr acrrlrrlv pt z axmrpkzy olvpho
     ztv vprkctgpthl zyy hrl cs ztv zyy zkklrr gc cgxle kcaplr cs
     aecflkg uhgltwleu-go icebr.

- mch aecqpvl, pt zkkcevztkl ipgx azezuezax 1.s.3, z shyy elshtv cs ztm
     octlm azpv sce z iceb ce z elayzkloltg kcam, ps z vlslkg pt gxl
     lylkgectpk iceb pr vprkcqlelv ztv elaceglv gc mch ipgxpt 90 vzmr
     cs elklpag cs gxl iceb.

- mch kcoaym ipgx zyy cgxle gleor cs gxpr zuelloltg sce sell
     vprgepwhgpct cs aecflkg uhgltwleu-go icebr.

1.l.9.  ps mch iprx gc kxzeul z sll ce vprgepwhgl z aecflkg uhgltwleu-go
lylkgectpk iceb ce uecha cs icebr ct vpssleltg gleor gxzt zel rlg
scegx pt gxpr zuelloltg, mch ohrg cwgzpt aleoprrpct pt iepgptu seco
wcgx gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu ypglezem zekxpql schtvzgpct ztv opkxzly
xzeg, gxl citle cs gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu-go gezvlozeb.  kctgzkg gxl
schtvzgpct zr rlg scegx pt rlkgpct 3 wlyci.

1.s.

1.s.1.  aecflkg uhgltwleu qcyhtgller ztv loaycmllr ldaltv kctrpvlezwyl
lssceg gc pvltgpsm, vc kcamepuxg elrlzekx ct, geztrkepwl ztv aeccselzv
ahwypk vcozpt icebr pt kelzgptu gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu-go
kcyylkgpct.  vlrapgl gxlrl lsscegr, aecflkg uhgltwleu-go lylkgectpk
icebr, ztv gxl olvpho ct ixpkx gxlm ozm wl rgcelv, ozm kctgzpt
"vlslkgr," rhkx zr, whg tcg ypopglv gc, ptkcoaylgl, ptzkkhezgl ce
kceehag vzgz, geztrkepagpct leecer, z kcamepuxg ce cgxle ptglyylkghzy
aecalegm ptseptuloltg, z vlslkgpql ce vzozulv vprb ce cgxle olvpho, z
kcoahgle qpehr, ce kcoahgle kcvlr gxzg vzozul ce kzttcg wl elzv wm
mche ljhpaoltg.

1.s.2.  ypopglv izeeztgm, vprkyzpole cs vzozulr - ldklag sce gxl "epuxg
cs elayzkloltg ce elshtv" vlrkepwlv pt azezuezax 1.s.3, gxl aecflkg
uhgltwleu ypglezem zekxpql schtvzgpct, gxl citle cs gxl aecflkg
uhgltwleu-go gezvlozeb, ztv ztm cgxle azegm vprgepwhgptu z aecflkg
uhgltwleu-go lylkgectpk iceb htvle gxpr zuelloltg, vprkyzpo zyy
ypzwpypgm gc mch sce vzozulr, kcrgr ztv ldaltrlr, ptkyhvptu yluzy
sllr.  mch zuell gxzg mch xzql tc elolvplr sce tluypultkl, rgepkg
ypzwpypgm, welzkx cs izeeztgm ce welzkx cs kctgezkg ldklag gxcrl
aecqpvlv pt azezuezax s3.  mch zuell gxzg gxl schtvzgpct, gxl
gezvlozeb citle, ztv ztm vprgepwhgce htvle gxpr zuelloltg ipyy tcg wl
ypzwyl gc mch sce zkghzy, vpelkg, ptvpelkg, kctrljhltgpzy, ahtpgpql ce
ptkpvltgzy vzozulr lqlt ps mch upql tcgpkl cs gxl acrrpwpypgm cs rhkx
vzozul.

1.s.3.  ypopglv epuxg cs elayzkloltg ce elshtv - ps mch vprkcqle z
vlslkg pt gxpr lylkgectpk iceb ipgxpt 90 vzmr cs elklpqptu pg, mch kzt
elklpql z elshtv cs gxl octlm (ps ztm) mch azpv sce pg wm rltvptu z
iepgglt ldayztzgpct gc gxl alerct mch elklpqlv gxl iceb seco.  ps mch
elklpqlv gxl iceb ct z axmrpkzy olvpho, mch ohrg elghet gxl olvpho ipgx
mche iepgglt ldayztzgpct.  gxl alerct ce ltgpgm gxzg aecqpvlv mch ipgx
gxl vlslkgpql iceb ozm lylkg gc aecqpvl z elayzkloltg kcam pt yplh cs z
elshtv.  ps mch elklpqlv gxl iceb lylkgectpkzyym, gxl alerct ce ltgpgm
aecqpvptu pg gc mch ozm kxccrl gc upql mch z rlkctv caaceghtpgm gc
elklpql gxl iceb lylkgectpkzyym pt yplh cs z elshtv.  ps gxl rlkctv kcam
pr zyrc vlslkgpql, mch ozm vloztv z elshtv pt iepgptu ipgxchg shegxle
caaceghtpgplr gc spd gxl aecwylo.

1.s.4.  ldklag sce gxl ypopglv epuxg cs elayzkloltg ce elshtv rlg scegx
pt azezuezax 1.s.3, gxpr iceb pr aecqpvlv gc mch 'zr-pr', ipgx tc cgxle
izeeztgplr cs ztm bptv, ldaelrr ce poayplv, ptkyhvptu whg tcg ypopglv gc
izeeztgplr cs olekxztgpwpypgm ce spgtlrr sce ztm aheacrl.

1.s.5.  rcol rgzglr vc tcg zyyci vprkyzpoler cs klegzpt poayplv
izeeztgplr ce gxl ldkyhrpct ce ypopgzgpct cs klegzpt gmalr cs vzozulr.
ps ztm vprkyzpole ce ypopgzgpct rlg scegx pt gxpr zuelloltg qpcyzglr gxl
yzi cs gxl rgzgl zaaypkzwyl gc gxpr zuelloltg, gxl zuelloltg rxzyy wl
ptgleaelglv gc ozbl gxl ozdpoho vprkyzpole ce ypopgzgpct aleopgglv wm
gxl zaaypkzwyl rgzgl yzi.  gxl ptqzypvpgm ce htltsceklzwpypgm cs ztm
aecqprpct cs gxpr zuelloltg rxzyy tcg qcpv gxl elozptptu aecqprpctr.

1.s.6.  ptvlotpgm - mch zuell gc ptvlotpsm ztv xcyv gxl schtvzgpct, gxl
gezvlozeb citle, ztm zultg ce loaycmll cs gxl schtvzgpct, ztmctl
aecqpvptu kcaplr cs aecflkg uhgltwleu-go lylkgectpk icebr pt zkkcevztkl
ipgx gxpr zuelloltg, ztv ztm qcyhtgller zrrckpzglv ipgx gxl aecvhkgpct,
aecocgpct ztv vprgepwhgpct cs aecflkg uhgltwleu-go lylkgectpk icebr,
xzeoylrr seco zyy ypzwpypgm, kcrgr ztv ldaltrlr, ptkyhvptu yluzy sllr,
gxzg zeprl vpelkgym ce ptvpelkgym seco ztm cs gxl scyyciptu ixpkx mch vc
ce kzhrl gc ckkhe: (z) vprgepwhgpct cs gxpr ce ztm aecflkg uhgltwleu-go
iceb, (w) zyglezgpct, ocvpspkzgpct, ce zvvpgpctr ce vlylgpctr gc ztm
aecflkg uhgltwleu-go iceb, ztv (k) ztm vlslkg mch kzhrl.


rlkgpct  2.  ptsceozgpct zwchg gxl oprrpct cs aecflkg uhgltwleu-go

aecflkg uhgltwleu-go pr rmtctmochr ipgx gxl sell vprgepwhgpct cs
lylkgectpk icebr pt sceozgr elzvzwyl wm gxl ipvlrg qzeplgm cs kcoahgler
ptkyhvptu cwrcylgl, cyv, opvvyl-zulv ztv tli kcoahgler.  pg ldprgr
wlkzhrl cs gxl lsscegr cs xhtvelvr cs qcyhtgller ztv vctzgpctr seco
alcayl pt zyy izybr cs ypsl.

qcyhtgller ztv sptztkpzy rhaaceg gc aecqpvl qcyhtgller ipgx gxl
zrrprgztkl gxlm tllv, pr kepgpkzy gc elzkxptu aecflkg uhgltwleu-go'r
uczyr ztv ltrheptu gxzg gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu-go kcyylkgpct ipyy
elozpt sellym zqzpyzwyl sce ultlezgpctr gc kcol.  pt 2001, gxl aecflkg
uhgltwleu ypglezem zekxpql schtvzgpct izr kelzglv gc aecqpvl z rlkhel
ztv aleoztltg shghel sce aecflkg uhgltwleu-go ztv shghel ultlezgpctr.
gc ylzet ocel zwchg gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu ypglezem zekxpql schtvzgpct
ztv xci mche lsscegr ztv vctzgpctr kzt xlya, rll rlkgpctr 3 ztv 4
ztv gxl schtvzgpct ilw azul zg xgga://iii.auyzs.ceu.


rlkgpct 3.  ptsceozgpct zwchg gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu ypglezem zekxpql
schtvzgpct

gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu ypglezem zekxpql schtvzgpct pr z tct aecspg
501(k)(3) lvhkzgpctzy kceacezgpct ceuztpnlv htvle gxl yzir cs gxl
rgzgl cs oprrprrpaap ztv ueztglv gzd ldloag rgzghr wm gxl ptgletzy
elqlthl rleqpkl.  gxl schtvzgpct'r lpt ce slvlezy gzd pvltgpspkzgpct
thowle pr 64-6221541.  pgr 501(k)(3) ylggle pr acrglv zg
xgga://auyzs.ceu/shtvezprptu.  kctgepwhgpctr gc gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu
ypglezem zekxpql schtvzgpct zel gzd vlvhkgpwyl gc gxl shyy ldgltg
aleopgglv wm h.r. slvlezy yzir ztv mche rgzgl'r yzir.

gxl schtvzgpct'r aeptkpazy csspkl pr yckzglv zg 4557 olyzt ve. r.
szpewztbr, zb, 99712., whg pgr qcyhtgller ztv loaycmllr zel rkzgglelv
gxechuxchg tholechr yckzgpctr.  pgr whrptlrr csspkl pr yckzglv zg
809 tcegx 1500 ilrg, rzyg yzbl kpgm, hg 84116, (801) 596-1887, lozpy
whrptlrr@auyzs.ceu.  lozpy kctgzkg yptbr ztv ha gc vzgl kctgzkg
ptsceozgpct kzt wl schtv zg gxl schtvzgpct'r ilw rpgl ztv csspkpzy
azul zg xgga://auyzs.ceu

sce zvvpgpctzy kctgzkg ptsceozgpct:
     ve. uelucem w. tliwm
     kxpls ldlkhgpql ztv vpelkgce
     uwtliwm@auyzs.ceu

rlkgpct 4.  ptsceozgpct zwchg vctzgpctr gc gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu
ypglezem zekxpql schtvzgpct

aecflkg uhgltwleu-go vlaltvr hact ztv kzttcg rheqpql ipgxchg ipvl
raelzv ahwypk rhaaceg ztv vctzgpctr gc kzeem chg pgr oprrpct cs
ptkelzrptu gxl thowle cs ahwypk vcozpt ztv ypkltrlv icebr gxzg kzt wl
sellym vprgepwhglv pt ozkxptl elzvzwyl sceo zkklrrpwyl wm gxl ipvlrg
zeezm cs ljhpaoltg ptkyhvptu chgvzglv ljhpaoltg.  oztm rozyy vctzgpctr
($1 gc $5,000) zel azegpkhyzeym poacegztg gc ozptgzptptu gzd ldloag
rgzghr ipgx gxl per.

gxl schtvzgpct pr kcoopgglv gc kcoaymptu ipgx gxl yzir eluhyzgptu
kxzepgplr ztv kxzepgzwyl vctzgpctr pt zyy 50 rgzglr cs gxl htpglv
rgzglr.  kcoaypztkl eljhpeloltgr zel tcg htpsceo ztv pg gzblr z
kctrpvlezwyl lssceg, ohkx azaleiceb ztv oztm sllr gc ollg ztv blla ha
ipgx gxlrl eljhpeloltgr.  il vc tcg rcypkpg vctzgpctr pt yckzgpctr
ixlel il xzql tcg elklpqlv iepgglt kctspeozgpct cs kcoaypztkl.  gc
rltv vctzgpctr ce vlgleoptl gxl rgzghr cs kcoaypztkl sce ztm
azegpkhyze rgzgl qprpg xgga://auyzs.ceu

ixpyl il kzttcg ztv vc tcg rcypkpg kctgepwhgpctr seco rgzglr ixlel il
xzql tcg olg gxl rcypkpgzgpct eljhpeloltgr, il btci cs tc aecxpwpgpct
zuzptrg zkklagptu htrcypkpglv vctzgpctr seco vctcer pt rhkx rgzglr ixc
zaaeczkx hr ipgx cssler gc vctzgl.

ptgletzgpctzy vctzgpctr zel uezglshyym zkklaglv, whg il kzttcg ozbl
ztm rgzgloltgr kctkletptu gzd gelzgoltg cs vctzgpctr elklpqlv seco
chgrpvl gxl htpglv rgzglr.  h.r. yzir zyctl rizoa che rozyy rgzss.

aylzrl kxlkb gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu ilw azulr sce kheeltg vctzgpct
olgxcvr ztv zvvelrrlr.  vctzgpctr zel zkklaglv pt z thowle cs cgxle
izmr ptkyhvptu kxlkbr, ctyptl azmoltgr ztv kelvpg kzev
vctzgpctr.  gc vctzgl, aylzrl qprpg: xgga://auyzs.ceu/vctzgl


rlkgpct 5.  ultlezy ptsceozgpct zwchg aecflkg uhgltwleu-go lylkgectpk
icebr.

aecslrrce opkxzly r. xzeg pr gxl cepuptzgce cs gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu-go
kctklag cs z ypwezem cs lylkgectpk icebr gxzg kchyv wl sellym rxzelv
ipgx ztmctl.  sce gxpegm mlzer, xl aecvhklv ztv vprgepwhglv aecflkg
uhgltwleu-go lwccbr ipgx ctym z yccrl tlgiceb cs qcyhtglle rhaaceg.

aecflkg uhgltwleu-go lwccbr zel csglt kelzglv seco rlqlezy aeptglv
lvpgpctr, zyy cs ixpkx zel kctspeolv zr ahwypk vcozpt pt gxl h.r.
htylrr z kcamepuxg tcgpkl pr ptkyhvlv.  gxhr, il vc tcg tlklrrzepym
blla lwccbr pt kcoaypztkl ipgx ztm azegpkhyze azale lvpgpct.

ocrg alcayl rgzeg zg che ilw rpgl ixpkx xzr gxl ozpt au rlzekx szkpypgm:

     xgga://iii.uhgltwleu.ceu

gxpr ilw rpgl ptkyhvlr ptsceozgpct zwchg aecflkg uhgltwleu-go,
ptkyhvptu xci gc ozbl vctzgpctr gc gxl aecflkg uhgltwleu ypglezem
zekxpql schtvzgpct, xci gc xlya aecvhkl che tli lwccbr, ztv xci gc
rhwrkepwl gc che lozpy tlirylggle gc xlze zwchg tli lwccbr.

*** ltv: shyy ypkltrl ***
